Where did this idea of a two hundred bird year even come from? I don't
precisely recall; I do remember putting together a spreadsheet
of possible candidates over Christmas in 2017, and agreeing with Mum
that we'd give it a go. At the time I thought it was achievable but I
wasn't certain - finding out would certainly be an interesting
mission. 

We work our way through the bird book, classifying 253 different
species as either Easy/Medium/Hard/Very Hard, and adding a note or two
as to where some of the trickier ones might be located, and we're
off. I add some tracking columns so the spreadsheet can do the
counting for us.

Many birders are up bright and early on New Year's Day, eager to make
a start on a new list. I had grand schemes for a visit to Barnes or
Rainham, that were utterly besmirched by a soul-destroying hangover
that confined me to quarters until long after the best part of the day
had departed.

I was escorted out of the house by Emma around four in the afternoon
for a walk around the Hampstead Heath extension and Golders Hill
Park. Neither of these are tremendous sites for scarcities or
rarities, but they do have some attractions in the Winter. Amongst the
Black-headed Gulls, a reliable few Common Gulls hang - not a bad tick,
given they're inapt naming. The Heath extension yields some excellent
views of Redwing, and a Great Spotted Woodpecker made a quick flypast
as we reached the end of the extension and turned towards GHP.

The walk around GHP is hard work; I am struggling to keep my eyes open
when I should be interrogating the flocks of small birds for any signs
of a Goldcrest (or possibly even a Firecrest). A little band of
long-tailed tits flops across the path; something amongst them is
considerably chunkier; a finch rather than a tit. The usual suspects
don't match - this is a flecked grey bird with some green hints. My
unwilling brain loads up the 'less usual' finches datafile and offers up
"female Siskin?". The light is fading almost as fast as my ability to
stay upright; a consultation of the bird book before the mental image
confirms a wholly unexpected little treat to the first day's list.

The week passes without any helpful species displaying themselves to
me on the cycle to work; daily sightings of parrot crossbills in
Broxbourne Woods frustrate me as I sit at work, wondering if they will
hang on until the weekend.

I manage to sell Emma a wintry walk in the woods. We link up with a
train to Bayford and set off in search off the crossbills from
there. I am pleasantly surprised by the amount of birdlife before we
even get near - the scenery is remarkable for a place only forty
minutes out of London. 

A quick trot through Brickendon deposits us at the start of a footpath
towards the area of the woods where the crossbills have been seen, but
we get distracted by a noisy flock of colourful Siskins having a drink
at a small pond. Delightful. Another flock of finches commuting
between some shrubs and a hedgerow turn out to be mostly Brambling;
another pleasant surprise - they're a bird that might otherwise have
required a more directed bit of seeking out later in the year.

With all these distractions, we're a good ninety minutes later into
the woods than I'd hoped. We interrogate some serious looking
birders. The news isn't good; no-one's seen them today, and some of
these folks have been in the area for several hours. We follow the
directions given "keep going until you reach the crossroads" as best
we can. Precisely which crossroads is given away by the cluster of
well-equipped folks hanging around near it. They're clearly on full
alert, but all in different directions. Another bad sign. A few more
short conversations confirm that no-one's had any luck.

We hang about a bit, and our focus is rewarded. Not with crossbills,
but with treecreepers and goldcrests. Seemingly everything that moves
in the wood is one or the other - they seem to outnumber even the
usual tit suspects today. They're both year ticks, but even if they
weren't, the accessibility of them brings bit of cheer to an otherwise
cold and grey pause in a wood.

One birder towards the younger end of the spectrum marches off on a
brief trespass with crossbill calls emanating from his phone. We take
this as a clear sign that we should be off; we've got a decent circuit
ahead of us and I can already feel my stomach starting to anticipate
arriving at the pub at the other end. The treecreepers and goldcrests
follow us most of the way round, to our delight.

We stop in the Farmer's Boy for a late lunch, and to attempt to dry
out our shoes and socks; despite our efforts, the mud has penetrated
to our feet. The food is good, and the radiators effective; we head
back towards the station renewed, and pick up a bonus Mistle Thrush on
the golf course on the road there. 

It's a successful trip; I've managed to combine a mild twitch with a
decent walk, a selection of year ticks, a decent lunch and a small
pleasant town. Emma is sufficiently entertained to allow the
possibility of heading to Barnes the next day.

We arrive at Barnes (a.k.a WWT London) just after 10:30am with the
bright eyes and bushy tail that should have been deployed six days
previous. Why Barnes (and not Rainham)? I'll give you a clue: it's
cold, but the sun is shining, and there's only a slight
breeze. Rainham might yield a Bearded Reedling or two, or maybe a
Short-Eared Owl later in the day, but we're in Barnes to get a
potential difficulty out of the way as soon as possible; the Bittern.

Bitterns can be elusive, but Barnes has, for me, proved quite
reliable; I've seen two or three different birds on the reserve on
cold winter days. Occasionally they might even be describable as
confiding - on one occasion one even climbed up the front of the reed
bed in beautiful sunshine as if to pose for photos. For Emma though,
they've proven a bit of a bogey species; despite multiple attempts,
she's not seen one, and has started to question their existence.

Even without the Bittern, Barnes should yield most of the Winter
wildfowl species - there's almost always a pair of wintering Pintail,
for example. We head out on to the reserve in good spirits; there are
reports of a Bittern from the Dulverton hide. The usual plan
(Wildside, then back via the visitor centre round to the Peacock
tower) is put aside and we head there directly.

There's excitement in the hide as we enter; we squeeze in and set up a
scope on the right hand side, and by listening in on the more
experienced voices explaining what's going on, quickly get on to the
Bittern in the opposite reedbed. Well, that was easy! A few folks in
the hide are struggling to locate the bird, so after having a decent
look we put the scope out to public use. Our bit of public service is
brought to an end a few minutes later when the Bittern unceremoniously
pushes its way back into the anonymity of the reedbed. We escape
before we have to explain to any newcomers what they've just missed
and head towards the Peacock hide.

There have been reports of Water Pipit from here. I am double
sceptical; firstly of my ability to discern this bird from other
pipits, and secondly of its ability to stay within the parts of the
reserve where I'm going to be able to pick it out. As such, not a lot
of effort is extended scanning for it; the Water Pipit's existence is
roundly brought into question by all concerned, and we refocus.

A pair of peregrines nest on Charing Cross Hospital every year, and
outside of breeding season they can often be seen on a couple of
favourite perching points. A glance through the bins finds a couple of
promising looking shapes, and a look through the scope confirms it;
peregrine is, remarkably, the first raptor of 2018. The usual pintail
pair are quickly located on the main lake to round off a productive
weekend; we head home to warm up.

Another week passes; this one is full of reports of Hawfinches. As far
as I can work out, thousands have turned up across the country; none
of them convenient enough for a mid-week bike excursion to catch up
with them. I spend the week sifting through the various sighting
reports to try and find the sweet spot for a weekend attempt. I've not
seen a Hawfinch before, so I don't much fancy having to pick one out
in flight; we want a decent sized flock with a reputation for sitting
about a bit. We also want to be able to get there using public
transport and a bicycle in under an hour and a half.

These criteria quickly boil the options down to one; a big flock has
frequently been seen in the back of a churchyard in
Bramfield. Accessibility isn't great; it's a half hour cycle at each
end of a forty minute train journey.

The cycle from Hertford North to Bramfield has some surprises, though;
a Red Kite floats above the road. A collection of blobs in a furrowed
field catches my eye as I cycle by. The bird book section of the brain
pipes up excitedly: "were those grey partridges?" Well, potentially,
but could you be quicker next time? I turn the bike around, retrace my
steps (pedal strokes?) and cast my eyes over where the blobs were.

Were being the operative word. As the area is now blob
free. Hmm. That's quite the disappearing act. There are hints of bird
along the ridges of the furrows, but they could just as easily be
rocks. A watched field never boils, they say, so I briefly examine my
phone to make sure I'm still on the right track. I am. No further
report of Hawfinches has been recorded from up the road,
however. 

There, that ought to suffice. I glance quickly at the field, and what
were hints of blobs are now blobs once more, fooled into action by my
pretence of non-interest. Even better, they clearly _are_ grey
partridges; a bird I've never seen in the wild before. Hertfordshire's
already gone up in my birding estimation, and we're only a couple of
weeks into the year.

Bramfield isn't far from here, and it's cold, so the partridges
perhaps don't get the attention they deserved. A brief wrong turn adds
a couple of minutes to the remainder of the journey, but it's clear
where I'm supposed to be looking as I cycle through town; there's a
couple of folks with scopes malingering with intent at a churchyard
gate. I lock the bike to a nearby street sign and head in.

An excited collection of folks is gathered a few metres in, scanning
some conifers behind the church itself. I join in and immediately
clock a chunky looking finch near the top of one of them; it turns its
head to reveal a beak to inspire a new generation of crushing
machinery, and it's clear I've got a Hawfinch. The conifers yield two
or three more; then a good ten to fifteen more birds join them. This
was the right choice; no uncertainty in the diagnosis, no lengthy
twitch, a decent couple of ticks on the way there.

I spend a good half an hour in the churchyard helping the next
arrivals find the Hawfinches, and then set out home before the light
fails. The partridges are still in the same spot (now I've seen them
they seem disinclined to perform their vanishing act); the red kite
has been replaced by a kestrel; Hertford North offers a decent bacon
sandwich while you wait; a pheasant hurriedly scuttles into the
undergrowth as the train back into London rushes by. A successful day.

This week's "please stay there until the weekend" report is the Little
Bunting at Walthamstow Reservoirs. Saturday is taken by non-bird plans
(!), but Sunday is not. Sunday arrives, and it appears my luck is
partially in; the bird is, apparently, still around. Only partially
in, mind; it feels like this is the coldest London has been for some
time even before the windchill.

This is _definitely_ a twitch. It's a good job Emma is absent; this
would _not_ be her scene. There's a veritable horde of birders waiting
around where the bunting's been seen; some had success around an hour
ago, but nothing's been seen since. Nothing is what continues to
happen for quite some time; even the reed buntings that were hopping
about when I arrived go to ground. 

The weather worsens; the wind gets up, it starts to snow. Much effort
is expended scanning the trees and bushes where the bird was last
seen.

A prominent local birder with a pristine east end accent and a giant
golf umbrella is remonstrating (it isn't clear who with) about the
management of the reserve. Walthamstow was, up until recently, managed
by Thames Water, but last October it was opened up as a more publicly
accessible site, with trails, and a new name: "Walthamstow Wetlands".

In short, the site went from "out of bounds to everyone except,
basically, a bunch of anoraks: fishermen and birders who obtained the
necessary permits" (thanks,
[Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2017/oct/19/walthamstow-wetlands-london-birdwatching-nature-reserve-free-entry))
to well promoted outdoor space open to everyone. Our local expert is
not impressed with how the change has been managed:

"There's no place for the wildlife anymore". "You get here now, and
people are jogging along the tops of the reservoirs - think about the
disturbance that's going to make to the birds that inhabit the
edge". "No-one is enforcing the areas where dogs aren't supposed to
go". There's something mildly entertaining about this litany; he's got
a point, and the delivery is excellent. Or possibly it's so cold that
I've started to go mad.

The snow gets heavier before it gets lighter. This is borderline
ridiculous; the visibility is such that the area of scrub where the
bird is supposed to be is obscured from view. Several folks head back
towards the visitor centre to shelter; the foolhardier of us (a good
ten or so) hang about.

Some time around 1pm the weather starts to clear a bit. I scrunch my
feet up within my shoes in an attempt to invoke the spirit of Die
Hard. A few littlies start to show some movement in the grassy patch
in front of us. A group of three birds flaps up into one of the trees
at the back of the patch. They're definitely buntings, and the one
sitting at 10 'o' clock is decidedly paler, even in this half-arsed
wintry light. Our narrator pipes up "Little Bunting!" and indeed, that's
what it clearly is.

The bird hangs about for a fair old while at this point; long enough
for some of the less hardy crew to return from their warm sanctuary in
the visitor centre to catch up with it, the lucky sods. Having found
the bird, I take a step outside myself and consider the sanity of
having come out on such a twitch. Verdict: non-committal. One thing is
for sure - I am far, far too cold to visit the other side of the
reserve, where there is apparently a scaup. The only thing left to do
is pick up a celebratory Subway on the way home. What a way to spend
half a Sunday.

The next weekend stays mysteriously free; a short-notice winter trip
to Norfolk is hastily planned; we'll do our usual trip of picking up a
car from Stansted Airport and driving the rest.

After a gnarly drive from Stansted to King's Lynn in the dark, we bed
down in a room in the local Wetherspoons. The Brexit pamphlets are not
nearly as amusing as being woken up at three in the morning by...is
that someone coughing? No, that would be vomiting. Terrific. 

We're up not too long afterwards; yes, a busy day awaits us, but we
need to be at Snettisham a good half hour or so before first light if
we're going to catch up with the Pink Footed Goose flyover
spectacular.

Emma is not at all convinced by this plan, but having bundled her into
the car, her mood improves (as a side note, I suspect the soothing
effect on Emma of being chauffeured around is no small part of our
relationship's stability). We find the correct car park (one step
better than I managed the last time I was here), kit up and traipse
off along the trail towards the Wash; there's just enough light to not
need a torch.

I'm half way between excited and fearful - the RSPB's website
maintains a list of which dates are sensible to see this spectacle,
and while yesterday was listed, today isn't. I'm hoping there's enough
noise in that schedule that we're going to be lucky; I'm going to be
in trouble for this early start otherwise.

It's a pleasant enough walk to the beach; there's not a lot to see; we
pick up the first little grebe on the way but otherwise there isn't
much about. We reach the beach and continue South towards the hides -
a few waders that are new for the year (Oystercatcher, Knot) provide
some distractions, but they aren't what we're really here for. Having
adjudged that we've come far enough, I cup my ears towards the
water. Not a lot. Staring at the horizon doesn't help much either -
there doesn't seem to be anything happening. Oh dear.

A few minutes pass; I do my very best impression of someone who
remains convinced that something is going to happen. Thankfully, the
pretence isn't required for long; the excited honks and squeaks of a
few thousand geese starts to reach the beach, and I think I can pick
out some blobs in the distance that should shortly resolve to the
sorts of formation I'd expect the geese to be in. It isn't much longer
before the first of the geese start passing overhead.

This is the really good bit. There's something about the noise of the
geese; it's a party atmosphere; they're off for a banquet of beets
just inland, and every goose is invited. It's hard not to grin from
ear to ear, and the grin lasts a while - there are thousands of these
geese on their way to breakfast, and it takes a good half an hour for
them all to get over us. I note with relief that Emma is similarly
cheered.

We do a quick loop around pit four, taking in all the hides. I roundly
misidentify some greylag geese as pink footed for a short while in the
first of them (not enough sleep), but the rest of this trundle is more
productive. A marsh harrier is quartering over a reedbed to the
South. A skylark comes to have a look at us. Two red legged partridge
fly off in a panic when we get too near. Both partridges before the
end of January - not bad! We return to the car by around half past
eight and set out to find ourselves a well deserved breakfast at the
[The Old Bank Bistro](https://www.theoldbankbistro.co.uk/).

Refuelled, we set out for Titchwell. It takes a gloriously small
amount of time; I'd forgotten how close everything together is in
North Norfolk. We park up, use the facilities and start to head into
the reserve, when a car entering the car park unceremoniously beeps at
us. We've not had much sleep, so this immediately raises our heckles;
who _dares_ beep at us when we're not even in the way? Oh, it's Mum
and Chris. What are they doing here?

Well, obviously, the same as us; Mum had mentioned a trip to Norfolk
was happening, but as far as I knew, the scheduled window for it had
ended a couple of days ago. Evidently plans had changed, or (more
likely) I wasn't paying attention. Four pairs of eyes being better
than two, we join forces; surely nothing can stop such a birding team!

Apart from the weather. Which, as we progress further towards the
beach, slowly deteriorates from harmless grey to the light but
penetrating drizzle that doesn't feel that dangerous but will handily
soak you through in under five minutes of exposure.

We're restricted to some very brisk walks between extended stays in
the hides. Mum and Chris share details of their exploits over the last
couple of days; useful for our own planning. 

The visit ends up being short, but productive. From a year
perspective, the best find is probably bar tailed godwit. It's
important because a.) one doesn't see them often and b.) discerning
the difference between bar and black tailed is difficult. Between us
we decided the specimen on the tidal marsh was indeed bar tailed. A
bit of scope deployment on the beach yielded common scoter and
red-breasted merganser, (no long-tailed duck, though). A drake
red-headed pochard was showing off on the freshwater marsh - not that
exciting, but good to have found it at this stage.

We part ways from Mum and Chris (who are off to see if they can find
Twite at Thornham) and continue our journey East. Our next stop is
Holkham; at this time of year there are reliable shore larks amongst
the dunes. In addition, there are reports of Bewick's swans and great
egret elsewhere in the area.

This is not the best timed visit. The weather is crappy. It's
borderline lunchtime. I deny any possibility that I might be hungry
and we march off towards the beach. We get to the beach. The beach is
big. Which way should we go? The instructions are clear in that
regard; we should go East. But how far? What are 'saltings'?

We guess that the long lumpy barrier parallel to the sea forming the
boundary between the beach and a marshy area is where we should
look. This yields some very confiding sanderlings and turnstones, but
no shore larks. Some more serious rain turns up and we had back inland
to take cover in the woods, wondering if the whole shore lark thing is
a con. A few goldcrest entertain us while we decide what to do.

The rest of the visit is similarly trying. We poll a large group of
birders on our way back about their successes, and they've seen the
shore larks, _and_ the great egret. We head to the hide where the
egret was seen, and, as we open the door, something that looks the
right shape and size is flying off to the extreme right of what is
visible. It drops down behind some reeds as I sit down. Hmm. Not good
enough for the list; I'm sleep deprived and hungry, I could very well
be making it up at this point. Of non-mute swan species there is
also no sign. Still, at least the hide has got us out of the rain.

We trudge back to the car once the rain eases off a little to lick our
wounds, and, more importantly, go in search of food. A fish and chip
shop in Wells is chosen and we hoof down the oversized portions with
gusto. That's better. With blood sugar returning to sensible levels,
the never-say-die ultra-birder in my head has re-examined the OS map
and decided it might be worth having another bash at shore lark from
the Wells end of the beach.

On my side is the pleasing aspect of the Wells end, and an improvement
in the weather. This isn't a murky trek in a freezing gale any more;
it's a pleasant stroll in the sun along a most attractive bit of sand,
with cute little beach huts perched at the border of the beach and the
woods behind.

We quickly reach the eastern end of the lump we were following from
the other end and agree: we're going to walk along here for fifteen
minutes, tops. Only a couple of minutes pass before my keen scanning
of the next 100m or so picks up a flock of eight birds that aren't the
right shape to be either the sanderlings or the dunlins from
earlier. They sit down on the beach side of the long lump (salting?)
and disappear.

Keen not to frighten them off, we move towards the sea from the
salting before moving in their direction. This works quite nicely, and
the birds graciously decide that they're going to scuttle towards
us. As they get closer it's obvious they are the shore larks - the
head is unmistakable. We stay still in the hope of getting a photo or
two, but a combination of their scuttling speed and the dreadful light
conditions make it a bit tricky. Still; great success, they do exist
after all.

At this point, it feels like we ought to be done for the day. Even
with the early start, the light is starting to fade. We've got a
reservation just beyond Cromer, we need to start making our way
there. I console myself that, in the darkness, the various reports I
am driving aren't really things I am missing out on. And it's been an
excellent day in any case; the pink footed geese and the shore larks
are the parts that have stayed with me in particular.

An enthusiastic host greets us at our B&B in Cromer. We are once again
starving; it turns out I've planned the birding parts of this trip
brilliantly, but the logistical parts less well. A nearby corner shop
is visited, two pot noodles are acquired and then clandestinely
consumed in our room. Tomorrow is another day.

Sunday has a considerably more leisurely start. There is no equivalent
of the goose spectacular to chase first thing in the morning,
thankfully. We head to Sheringham to see if we can catch up with
either the black redstarts that have been intermittently reported
there, or the apparently reliable purple sandpipers that frequent the
front.

Sheringham is...interesting. A real mish-mash of new and old
architecture. Neither of us find the overall effect particularly
convincing. The sea wall and promenades are to our liking though.

The search for the black redstart is...half hearted. This isn't the
first time we've looked for one in a place like this, and our previous
lack of success, combined with a considerably more casual attitude as
a result of yesterday's success and sleep deprivation, means we don't
really believe it's going to happen. We agree that a search for a
purple sandpiper is more likely to yield fruit, particularly after
consulting with a bunch of seawatchers who confidently direct us East
along the promenade (they haven't seen the redstart either).

With these instructions, we quickly find our purple friend conspiring
with a group of turnstones on a rocky promontory at the Eastern end of
the promenade. We spend a fair old while marvelling at its tremendous
grip on some very slippery looking rocks; it's a life tick, it needs a
bit of savouring. On the way back, I attempt a bit of seawatching;
even with a scope I am struggling though - there are definitely some
divers out there, but which of red-throated, black-throated and great
northern they are is not discernible to my novice eyes.

Our next stop is Strumpshaw Fen RSPB. Well, nominally. We've been
following the blog of [Marcus
Nash](https://norfolkbirdtours.wordpress.com/) and he frequently
manages to find Bean Goose in the area. In the end, we opt for a
_very_ muddy walk around the reserve instead, picking up the first
snipe and stonechat of the year, but not a lot else. This was really
only a filler visit anyway; we're headed South and East from Cromer
because, by the end of the day, we want to have made it to Stubb Mill.

We're here for one near-certainty and a couple of hopefuls. From the
watchpoint (quite a pleasing walk from the car-park, punctuated only
by criticism of the tour organiser's management of nutrition across
the weekend), it should be harder to not see cranes than to see
them. Hen harrier and barn owl should also be possible.

There are quite a few folks at the watch point; good - we've no idea
what we're doing. Our only experience of this sort of roost watch has
previously been at Wicken Fen; a much easier prospect because the area
to watch is much smaller. At the watch point, the land around just
opens up; I'd guess you can see at least 5km in every direction. It's
a bit daunting; pick the wrong point at the wrong time and you could
see nothing. The presence of seasoned professionals reduces the
probability of that occurring.

We're early. Nothing happens for quite some time. Further complaints
are forwarded to the tour organiser with regard to the temperature and
the amount of waiting around. Finally, a crane flaps over in front of
us. All is forgiven at the appearance of this giant and its soothingly
smooth flapping. Like the rest of the cranes we see over the next
hour, it drops down out of sight somewhere in the far distance.

In the gaps between the cranes, I'm eyeballing all the marsh harriers
I can find. They all stubbornly remain marsh, not hen. A flock of ten
cranes lands far off the left. Subsequently, one of the pros calls out
"male hen harrier". Directions are shared out. Even with the scope the
harrier is difficult to pick out; it's almost at the horizon. A great
view it is not, but a year tick it still is.

The encroaching cold encourages us to head back to the car; no barn
owl this time. We agree that, while the cranes were good, for a
freezing your arse off in midwinter experience, we prefer Wicken.

January total: 90. We'll be done by mid March at this rate. Hah.

Circumstances conspire to bring us back to Stansted to pick up a
different car the following weekend. Dad's just turned 65, and is
triumphantly retiring. We're meeting up with immediate family in
Aldeburgh to celebrate, taking the Friday off to allow for a bit of
gentle birding on the way.

The omens are good - before we've left the environs of the airport
we're two ticks up; there are rooks in the car park, and a sparrowhawk
flaps over the road on the way out of the car hire village (definitely
a thing). I briefly attempt to turn it into a goshawk, but my heart
isn't in it.

Did I mention the gentle bit? I should emphasise it. Last weekend we
overdid it; too much driving, not enough meandering. We're not going
to go on giant detours to find things this time; we'll just pick up
what's on the way. Our first stop is Hazlewood marsh, where there are
reports of Coues' Arctic Redpoll. I am ignoring the "Coues'" part, to
be honest. A common redpoll would do nicely, any old arctic would be a
luxury; one doesn't come across either of them very frequently.

That turns out to be a sensible bit of expectation setting, because of
anything other than common redpoll there is no sign. After a cursory
search, we decide to walk down to the hide that's perched on the edge
of the river Alde. Well, 'river'. We're in Suffolk, and the land is
flat; the river is close to 1km across here. There are a few waders
and wildfowl to see from the hide (along with the year's first meadow
pipits), but the best thing is the tranquillity of the place. I can
feel the stress of the week slowly leaving me. What a place.

There is still no sign of the c-a-r on the way back, and we feel
thoroughly vindicated in our decision to go for an explore
instead. Onward to Aldeburgh...

...where we quickly run into the rest of the family. In a happy
coincidence, the dogs (two giant labradoodles with perhaps half a
brain between them) need a walk, and the elected location takes us
South from Aldeburgh towards the Martello Tower at Slaughden (have fun
convincing your friends this is a.) a place and b.) pronounced however
you want it to be). We're on the alert for snow buntings. They ought
to be obvious, but they aren't. We walk to the limit of what's
publicly accessible, then turn for home. As we near the tower on the
home leg, Dad, having poked his nose in the bird book earlier for a
clue, reckons he's found them. He's right. Dad has gone from not
knowing what a snow bunting looks like to finding one before me in
under fifteen minutes. Oh well, they all count.

The next morning, we split into two teams; one is heading to Minsmere,
the other is going shopping. The Minsmere team is Emma, Dad and I. The
best bird we see is, in fact, just outside the reserve - there's a
glossy ibis bimbling around in the fields just before the
road-with-the-terrifying-bumps in. Dad is mostly here for marsh
harrier though, and there are enough of them to prove satisfactory. We
do a quick lap around the beach route before scooting off to
rendezvous with team shopping in Dunwich. One day I will visit
Minsmere at the right time and see all of the things, I declare. In my
mind. Convincing no-one.

There's a plot to go walking along the shingle beach at Dunwich after
lunch; I decline - yesterday's shingle exploits have done something
tedious to my feet, and I am really not up for making them any
worse. I give the raft of common scoters off to the North a bit of a
staring at, but there's no way I'm going to pick out a velvet
interloper at this range. 

On the landward side of the beach though, a giant white bird that can
only be great egret is flapping about. I remember visiting Dungeness
the last time I was year listing and having difficulty working out
whether I was looking at a swan the first time I came across one of
these birds. Now a seasoned great egret veteran, I can happily tick it
from this range.

Sunday is a birding write-off, but a walking triumph - we overcome a
foul Northerly wind to walk to Thorpeness for a delicious lunch. There
only remains the drive back to Stansted to drop off the car, and a
sleepy National Express coach ride back to Golders. Not as many ticks
as our previous weekend, but just as pleasant a trip.

A couple of weeks pass. Planning occurs. We have a growing collection
of people we know in Bristol that require a visit; they've both
successfully reproduced within the last few months. Having bumped into
Mum and Chris in January, plans are afoot for a further trip with a
less coincidental teaming up.

What's near Bristol and worth a visit at this time of year? Well,
there's one obvious candidate, and that's Slimbridge. While its
trademark cranes are already on our list, they aren't on Mum's, and
there are _plenty_ of other things we might catch up with.

Luxuriously, we are collected from London on the Friday evening and
driven to Slimbridge. Well, not quite - we're staying in the
gargantuan Tudor Arms nearby. After a sizeable breakfast (choose just
the bits you want) we set off. I've read somewhere that the fields
either side of the road between the canal and reserve proper are worth
a solid look, so we're on foot. Indeed, the fields are full of waders
and geese. Nothing too exciting, just a decent spectacle.

The reserve itself is busy. Our plan is simple - wander down to the
tower hide that overlooks the Severn, making a stop in each hide along
the way. The first hide is jam-packed; it becomes clear why - roughly
four square feet of it currently has a view of a little stint. We wait
our turn; by the time it turns up we're almost alone again, so we get
a good look. We also pick up Bewick's swan here. Leaving the location
of the stint in the hands of some newcomers, we move on.

The next hide has a view over a much larger area of wetland. It sets
the tone for the trip - the _number_ of birds is the impressive bit;
wodges of wigeon, gaggles of greylag geese, plenty of pintail (a very
smart duck, all told). Gallons of golden plover?  There's a flock of
several hundred that wheel around now and again; it's quite
something. A ruff (well, reeve) or two amble around the muddy
edges. Several redshank are examined under suspicion of being of the
spotted variety, but they're all found not guilty. A buzzard chilling
out on the fence to the extreme right of the area provides a nice
break from the watery lot.

Onwards again; the next real stop is the tower hide. Again, it's
_very_ busy. How is Slimbridge more jam packed than WWT London? I'm
torn between being pleased that there's so much birding enthusiasm and
feeling mildly claustrophobic. 

Mum is similarly troubled; the surfeit of greylag geese has only
brought into sharp focus the total lack of any of the white fronted
variety. Having stuffed myself into a seat at the side of the hide, I
happen across a remedy - a bunch of six white fronted geese flies in
and lands. There's something quite prideful about a goose and the
white around the beak this lot have seems to amplify it. This is _our_
reserve, we'll have you know. In other goose news, there are a few
Barnacle spotted around in the mud in front of us; probably wild
according to the professionals in the hide. To complete Mum's target
list, there are also several cranes poking about.

We beat a retreat from the Tower hide, and after a brief discussion,
from the reserve itself; we have a lunch plan to make and some more
exploring to do - birding wise not a lot happens, but we can recommend
[The Red Lion](http://www.redlionarlingham.co.uk/) if you're in need
of a meal and the world and his wife have already flooded Frampton.

We trespass further on parental time the next day by commandeering a
lift to Bristol. There's a hook though; we're going via Aust Warth,
where, by all accounts, there ought to be a short eared owl or two for
us to catch up with.

Aust is between the two Severn bridges. The land feels quite broken up
- "it's neither fish nor fowl" cries Emma; I'm reminded of various
Pratchettian descriptions of parts of Lancre. The RSPB would probably
describe it as having 'big skies'. It's definitely wild, and, frankly,
a bit grubby. There's a reedbed at the North East end (the M48
crossing), and an old ferry crossing. We park nearby (it seems to be
the only appropriate road) and have a bit of an explore.

There's no sign of the owls, but the place is sufficiently interesting
to not matter. Some inquisitive stonechat pop up to say hello - a year
tick for Mum. A water rail makes a brief appearance; annoyingly I
completely miss it. We make our way out to the old jetty and stare
into the distance a lot. No owls. Humph. Back to the car; we're
supposed to be meeting parent/newborn combo #1 in half an hour.

Just as the car pulls away, Mum triumphantly spots an owl off to the
right. It floats around over the wasteland between us and the river
before perching on an agreeable open stump a hundred metres or so
away. The car is stealthily manoeuvred alongside, and we have a good
look at it. 

It's a fine beast, and before long it treats us to a bit more
surverying of the general area, and a bit of squawking. A second owl
makes an appearance. It considers getting in the first one's face
briefly, but then thinks better of it, heading to a perch a safe
distance away. These owls, apparently, know how to share. We spend a
good quarter of an hour drinking in the behaviour of these birds
before it becomes plain to us that, sadly, it's time to make a
move. Given we'd given up, we're now all the more appreciative of the
treat we've just had.

February total: we're up to 109. A mid March finish may have been
overly optimistic. I guess we'll see.

Our trips this month end up being a bit closer to home. I decide,
arbitrarily, that this is the year I am going to track down lesser
spotted woodpecker. I've never seen one, and, according to all the
usual sources, the signs point to it getting harder to do so (the
annual breeding evidence of this bird is in decline).

A bit of research points strongly at Cassiobury Park in Watford as the
place to go. Apparently there's a patch of trees next to the car park
that are a reliable haunt for said woodpecker. There are even YouTube
videos from roughly this time last year; including some excellent
drumming (the Lesser variety drums for considerably longer, in case
you were wondering). Also, the park looks like it ought to have enough
paths to be a nice walk, and the metropolitan line out there makes it
a convenient trip. We make a pact to avoid falling into the trap of
referring to woodpeckers as 'peckers', because the giggling would,
eventually, get old.

We get to the park and it is disappointingly busy. There's some sort
of park run happening; we guess it probably kicked off about an hour
before we arrived, and the stragglers are still making their way
around. The old mantra of "everybody's got to be somewhere" comes to
mind, followed by the usual riposte of "but did they really all have
to be here?".

The promising copse next to the car park doesn't yield any
woodpeckers, but it does have a pair of obliging nuthatches, and some
unhelpful starlings that do a very good job of looking like several
other species. There's a pair of stock doves showing signs that they
might nest here, too.

We decide to have a wander around the rest of the park in case the
woodpecker is out on tour somewhere. This means getting closer to the
running groups, and the overenthusiastic marshals. Humph. We circuit
the East end of the park remarkably swiftly as a result, pausing only
to marvel at the endless redwings poking about in the undergrowth.

We pass by the modern looking coffee shop and playground to explore
the part of the park that's denominated as a nature reserve; it's
delineated by the river Gade on one side, and what we guess is the
grand union canal on the other. There are some charming footbridges to
allow access; that's enough to convince us to take a look.

Unfortunately, being surrounded by water has made much of the reserve
unnavigable by anything other than ducks; the main path across is
completely flooded. We do at least pick up a green woodpecker,
yaffling in some trees near the flooded area. We squelch around what
we think is a path South; a goldcrest squeaks angrily at us; we
assume, from the evidence shortly forthcoming, that it is trying to
warn us that further flooding has made this way impassable as well.

We reverse back to the bridge that brought us in and try a path
Northward. This seems more hopeful; there are a couple of anglers who
have made it, and before we know it we're on the canal towpath. We
consider a more strenuous walk across the golf course and around the
woods beyond, but change our minds half way; we'd rather head back to
the park for a coffee and a cake. There's a little egret risking life
and limb by poking around on the golf course's fairways.

After a quick stop for coffee (Emma) and brownie (me), we return to
the car park. Two serious looking birders are in the thicket we
previously explored. Alas, even they haven't been able to find our
LSW. They have found a Little Owl in a pair of ancient trees that we
may or may not have totally ignored on our way back. They give us
detailed instructions on where the bird is, and show us a couple of
excellent photos they managed to take.

We traipse over the to big trees. Immediately I wish I had been paying
a bit more attention to the instructions. All I've managed to store is
"left hand tree, about three quarters of the way up". I'm looking at
the left hand tree around three quarters of the way up. Whole lotta
tree. Not a lot of owl. Nil desperandum; we can only see perhaps a
third of the tree from this angle. Emma and I start to circle around
the tree at what we guess is a distance at which we won't disturb an
owl.

That does the trick; half way round the shape of an owl perched near
the trunk becomes clear to me. In the binoculars, it seems I am clear
to the owl as well; a step left or right from me is tracked very
carefully. I signal to Emma, and after a minor argument over how
terrible my directions are, she finds the owl too. The only mild
disappointment is that this specimen is quite so sleepy; the charm of
little owl is enhanced all the more when there's two or three of them
hopping about.

We conclude that we're either too early for an LSW, or that its
existence is a fabrication. Perhaps we'll have another go later in the
year.

The middle of March is quiet; a short visit to WWT London in an
attempt to find jack snipe fails, but does contribute a reasonably
early sand martin (March 18th).

A pair of our friends from the North have roped Emma into some charity
dinner and raffle. In Chelmsford. At the cricket club. This looks
above and beyond the call of duty. Unfortunately, the trains out to
Chelmsford that weekend are utterly hosed, and I am not sure I can
consign Emma to waking up hungover in an Essex Travelodge with a two
and a half hour journey home to look forward to.

My motives aren't entirely altruistic. To fix this I'm going to need
to hire a car. And if I'm going to have to be at this thing in the
_evening_, at Chelmsford, I can think of no better way to spend the
rest of the day than touring a few select birding sites in the
nearby. Not least because I have absolutely no intention of trying to
drive in and out of London anywhere between the hours of 9am and 9pm,
and that's going to give us a fair amount of day to play with.

A spanner is thrown into the works late on the Friday afternoon;
someone's found a bluethroat at Walthamstow Wetlands (nee
reservoirs). It's _just about_ on the way to where we're going, and,
handily, is on the Victoria line, so, after a brief negotiation with
our Northern friends, we agree to pick them up from there. That should
give us a good hour to see if the bluethroat has decided to stick
around.

It hasn't. We do catch up with the Little Bunting (yes, the same one)
on our way round (it's hanging out with its reed bunting friends, and
additionally, the first linnets of the year), and, to my surprise, I
manage to pick out the scaup (again, the same one) at the back of
reservoir number four without needing a scope. Smug. A tinkle of phone
noise informs us that our friends have arrived, so we return to the
car, and after a brief wrangle with the payment machinery at the car
park exit, we set off towards Essex.

Our first stop is supposed to be Hanningfield reservoir. We get nearby,
and quickly realise that our first stop is lunch. We sit at a table in
a pub making poor attempts at small talk (I mostly give these attempts
a thousand yard stare, as if to suggest my level of hanger is everyone
else's fault). Food eventually arrives and the collective mood
improves. Well, mine does. Everyone else is a rather better balanced.

Back to Hanningfield. There's an extensive set of nature trails with hides
attached. There is also some sort of deal on plastic animal masks in
the visitor centre. I heave a deep sigh as I realise these are going
to prove distracting to everyone other than me, and decide that my
best option is to head out and have a quiet bit of solo birding before
anyone realises where I've gone.

Hanningfield is a big old reservoir, and, typical of all birding I
have done at reservoirs, all the interesting birds are as far away
from the hides as it is possible to get. On the side near the hide, a
mallard or two perform within ten metres or so.

On the far side, huge numbers of wildfowl are bobbing about. Among
them I am hoping to find Slavonian Grebe; a Winter visitor to most of
the UK that often turns up on reservoirs of this size. This shouldn't
be too tricky a bird to find if it's here - it has a very different
profile in the water to the other grebes (great crested, little) that
might be here; someone's already done the tricking part of divining
that it is Slavonian and not Black-necked.

There's definitely something on the far side of the reservoir near the
causeways (no public access :-/) that fits the profile, but even in
the scope, it's barely more than a dot. There's no other scope toters
present, so I'm a bit stuck; "there's not much that could be other
than slav grebe" isn't enough to tick it. Humph.

Complaints from my phone tell me my disappearance has been noted; I
send word of my whereabouts and then try to give the other difficult
sods on the wrong side of the reservoir a bit of a look at, in case
they're of interest. Remarkably, some of them are - a little clutch of
ten of them have the detergent level whiteness that only Goosanders
possess. Well, that's a nice bonus.

The remainder of the hides don't offer a great deal on top of that;
it's interesting that, for what I'd pegged as a 'wet' reserve, most of
the quality is in the woodland; we're spoilt for treecreeper,
goldcrest and the usual suspects all the way round. Besides a little
group of folks on a photography course (we guess the theme is 'small
stuff', as many of the hapless participants are spending a lot of time
staring at featureless branches in the hope of, hmm. Sudden beetle
appearance?), it's also remarkably quiet. When I'm next wrangled into
Essex we'll probably pay this place another visit.

At this point, we need to drop our friends off in Chelmsford so they
can help get this event set up. Our arrival isn't due for another
three hours after that though, and I've got a bee in my bonnet about
getting to Wallasea Island. I've been planning a visit to this place
for years, and I've been stymied by illness, lack of trains, sudden
work commitments; you name it. Not today, though.

It's quite a pleasant drive from Chelmsford - the parts that aren't
Essex countryside idyll are mostly quiet bits of well maintained dual
carriageway. Just before you arrive at the reserve proper the
landscape changes quite dramatically; someone turns up the bleakness
level. What was rolling vivacious farmland becomes flat, treeless
wilderness, laced with muddy streams and bordered by slowly salinating
estuary. The road also thins, and develops some of the most violent
ramps known to mankind. It's quite a relief when we reach the car park.

The car park has room for perhaps fifteen vehicles. We are the third
car. A solitary corn bunting is acting security guard; it proudly sits
in a sapling off to the left. Tick. 

We've probably got an hour of daylight left - that should be enough
for a quick explore along the sea wall. A bundle of black headed gulls
to the South has some obvious looking Mediterranean Gulls amongst
them. There's a raptor sitting near what we suspect, on a warmer day,
would be a pleasant picnic area. We try and turn it into a Merlin, but
it stubbornly remains a Kestrel.

The North of the sea wall has decent number of waders poking around on
it - some nice curlew and redshank. Some shelduck float about
amiably. We scan a few distant landmarks for raptors (there's a huge
haystack in the distance that's supposed to be good for this, in
particular) and find nothing. Emma retreats to the car (it's getting
colder, and the wind is borderline unpleasant) and I hang about in the
hope of a last minute owl. This ought to be prime barn owl
territory. Unfortunately, no-one's told the barn owls. And now I am
also starting to feel the cold. I return to the car empty handed and
steel myself for the return journey over the ramps of doom.

The charity dinner is no worse than I'd imagined (we win some Odeon
tickets in the raffle, and some of the people we meet are borderline
entertaining. Also, we have two good friends there). I pay the sober
price for deciding to drive home immediately afterwards, but it pays
off; we wake up in our own house the day after, and it feels great. I
celebrate with a visit to Regent's Park, where I fail to find a
firecrest.

Next weekend arrives and presents one final opportunity to add to the
end of March total. Spring is starting to show its face; we opt for a
trip to Barnes. This time, there's no sign of bittern - there have
been intermittent reports of jack snipe. Given the lack of urgency we
choose our usual route: Headley, wildside, visitor centre (option of
coffee), meander to peacock hide.

An explosion of noise to the left of the headley hide; a Cetti's
warbler is there. Not unusual for Barnes. What is unusual: I can see
the little git. They usually hide in the deepest depths of cover, but
at this time of the year they pop up a bit more frequently. It's a
relief to tick it off so early in the season.

The walk around wildside is noisy but tick-free. Wildside itself is
somewhat better. It overlooks two grassy verges that make up the
border of the grazing marsh, and this should be the time of year
during which chats, wagtails and wheatear start to turn up. True to
form, there is indeed a wheatear on the left hand verge; it bobs about
cautiously near the fence posts that help keep foxes out of the marsh,
and is basically charming. We put a few other visitors on to it before
heading back to the visitor centre for refreshment.

We take the long way round the the peacock tower round the back of the
sheltered lagoon. This tends to be good for warblers, and we manage to
pick up a chiffchaff in one of the numerous silver
birches. Excellent. We take a brief sojourn in the scrape hide to
admire the smattering of sand martins before taking a seat on the top
floor of the peacock hide.

It's here that the real mission begins. Can we find one of these pesky
jack snipe? I've only ever been shown them before, and never actually
found one myself.There are apparently one or two around; they've been
seen on the islands of the wader scrape today, according to some folks
in the hide.

Best get comfortable; this could take a while. Jack snipe are smaller
than their common brethren, their plumage provides better camouflage,
and they are typically far less keen to show themselves. There are
some common snipe around the edges of the island; that's actually
quite useful to establish a baseline in terms of scale.

The leftmost island, to me, looks most promising; it has the most
cover; the others are really just mud - it's quite easy to see that
their only inhabitants are lapwings and redshanks. A prolonged scan of
the left hand island it is, then.

I catch a glimpse of something that looks a more straw like brown and
with a shorter beak than the common snipe. Is it a bird, or is it an
assemblage of reedy grass? I try to switch from binoculars to scope
and lose all trace of it. Hmm. No, wait, there's something scuttling
between those two reedy patches, what's that? It's a jack snipe. I
emit excited noises, and unilaterally fail to direct Emma (or anyone
else in the hide) on to it. 

This is problematic. Everyone in the hide is probably thinking what I
think in this situation, i.e: this idiot is making it up; what a dick!
Now I have to find it again, and direct _at least_ two people on to it
as well, one of whom must be Emma, or I'll never live this down.

This takes _significantly_ longer. Having just spent twenty whole
seconds in the open the jack snipe disappears for half an
hour. Tireless scanning from yours truly eventually relocates it
poking around right at the very back of the island. This time I stay
quiet, tighten all the bits of scope I can find to prevent wobble and
usher Emma to have a look through it, which she does ("Oh, it does
look totally different; you weren't lying"). A couple of other birders
have found it simultaneously, and I can now safely leave free of
'making the whole thing up' suspicion. Relief all round.

March total: 121. Uh-oh, this is looking like a log curve.

April arrives, and with it, hopefully, a flurry of new ticks from
spring migration. After a successful jack snipe at Barnes the day
before, it's time for another trip to Cassiobury Park. An enthusiastic
photographer claims to have found one earlier in the day, but on
inspection, what they have is a female greater spotted woodpecker. I
let them down gently, and they get on to talking about the kingfishers
they've been photographing upriver; this is interesting news, as I
haven't seen one yet this year. Having stared at trees and seen
nothing for far too long, I decide to change tack. Let's try and find
this kingfisher instead.

I head off up the river and a kingfisher rockets past me in the
opposite direction. That'll do. It'll probably also be the best I
manage; kingfishers are notoriously shy, and there's nowhere for me to
take cover along here. A grey wagtail cheerfully bobs about on some
branches in the centre of the river (they're a terribly named bird;
yellow-bellied-ridiculously-long-tailed-but-really-pretty-smart
wagtail would be more accurate). A quartet of mandarin ducks floats by
on the far side. I suppose that will just have to do.

April 2nd is Easter Monday. [Samuel
Levy](https://twitter.com/FinchleyBirder) has heard a lesser spotted
woodpecker while walking up Dollis Brook towards Totteridge. That's a
walk we can do from our flat without too much difficulty. The weather,
though ominous, looks as if it may hold off until 1 or 2pm; if all
else fails, we're rarely more than a ten minute dash away from the bus
home.

This is not the most productive birding trip we manage. The path to
the brook is partially closed, so we end up taking a salubrious tour
of the North Circular's pavements. Delightful. When we manage to
intersect with the brook, it has big warning signs near it to stay out
of the water, for it is likely to be toxic. Nice.

The appearance of a great spotted woodpecker just South of the Windsor
Open Space heralds a major improvement; the amount of refuse strewn
around is greatly reduced, there's something approaching a view, the
smell is less bad; and, in places, completely absent.

We pass under the attractive Dollis viaduct; there's a hint of rain in
the air. By the time we've walked alongside the golf club, it's more
than a hint, and by the time we start to get in range of the open
farmland part of this walk, it's chucking it down. Arse. We walk up
into West Finchley to intersect with a bus home.

Overexcitement/overoptimism leads me to take a pair of binoculars to
work, in case something interesting turns up in Regent's Park (on the
way home) or Barnes (a manic lunchtime rush). Nothing turns up until
Friday, when someone sticks a report of Hoopoe at Brent Reservoir on
birdguides.

This is, possibly, the least accessible site in London. I have cycled
to it once before and ended up briefly on the North Circular;
frightening. For the possibility of a Hoopoe though, I suppose it
might be worth the risk. Twenty minutes after leaving work, I am
weaving my way _under_ the North Circular on some godawful three lane
road. I mark the occasion by spending most of it yelling
"aaaaaaarrrrggghhh" which seems to keep the other vehicles away from
me.

There is, of course, no bloody sign of any Hoopoe. Unlike my previous
visit, though, I do manage to work out where there hides are. I'm in
luck - one of them has some folks in it (otherwise, it'd be
locked). They've heard about the Hoopoe, but it's gone to ground some
hours ago. There are a couple of common snipe poking around, and, as a
consolation prize, three little ringed plover. 

This area of the reservoir probably has as many species of rubbish as
it does birds - there are several pieces of car, miscellaneous
unidentifiable plastic and wire, bits of boat. Thankfully, the birds
don't seem to mind, and the brighter and larger pieces of rubbish act
as excellent landmarks when directing folks to a nearby bird.

The hint of a sandpiper as I entered the hide and the excellent
company (for the other inhabitants are very friendly) keep me in the
hide until the light fails. I manage to trace a route home that's
considerably less dangerous than the North Circular, even if some of
the other people using it seem a bit threatening. It's probably just
the light.

The weekend of the 7th arrives. I am on call on the Saturday; I need
to stay near an internet connection. Emma disappears off to meet some
of our friends for a night out in South London. Trouble. We're in
prime Ring Ouzel territory, and I'm hoping to get to Ivinghoe Beacon
tomorrow; there's no chance of that happening if it turns out to be a
big one. There's only one thing for it; now any chance of a call has
gone, I'm going to have to brave the trip across the river to show
willing.

This is a trendy group. I am informed they are somewhere within
Peckham Levels, and that getting in should be simple. I arrive around
9pm; there are around a hundred people queuing. A little light
questioning reveals that it is one in one out. Oh joy. I make contact
with an ally on the inside, and they begin to canvas the group for the
possibility of leaving. Thankfully, I've brought a book.

At some point, a mildly tipsy Emma emerges to find me in the
queue. She carries no information as to the plans of the remainder of
the group, but the gesture is much appreciated. Until she realises
she's left her things inside, and the bouncers won't let her fetch
them.

Eventually, the group inside decides it's time to move on. One of them
brings Emma's things; phew. We relocate to a pool club that doubles as
a night spot. It's grubby but serviceably, but woe betide you if you
are foolish enough to consider leaving any of your bags on the utterly
dance-free dancefloor. The energy of the group is waning somewhat. I
quietly mention to Emma that leaving shortly would allow us to get the
last train home. That does the trick. We're asleep just before 1am;
all is not lost.

It's a slow start the next morning, but it _is_ a start. We need to go
into central in order to go out, so it's Northern line to Euston
followed by national rail to Tring. Arriving at Tring, we're straight
onto [the Ridgeway](https://www.nationaltrail.co.uk/ridgeway) towards
Ivinghoe beacon. At least three Ring Ouzel were seen there yesterday
on their way North; we should be in with a fighting chance of seeing
one ourselves.

The weather hasn't been on our side during the week - the path is
sodden; it takes some fancy footwork to stay upright; it's neither a
particularly flat or wide trail at this point. There are unhappy
complaints from just (actually, increasinly) behind me on this very
subject. Thankfully, we've tried this route before, and so it's with a
very honest face I can turn around and say "once we're into this wood
it gets a lot better".

A red kite sheltering on the edge of the wood provides a further
distraction, and the general mood improves. On the exit of the woods,
we start to climb Pitstone Hill. It's here that the landscape starts
to open up a bit, and my radar tells me this isn't the last place we
might find an Ouzel. I blitz up to the top of the hill to obtain the
best view, and to the North, sitting on a fence, is a blob of roughly
the right size and colour. Probably just a blackbird. Nope; there's
that patch of white on the chest; my first ever Ring Ouzel. Woo. Emma
catches up; the bird obliges her with a decent view as well.

We're now back into solid walk territory - we might as well get to the
end of the trail at Ivinghoe beacon. I push my luck by taking the
steep descent on the North side. More complaints. An attempt at lunch
in Ivinghoe fails; yet another country pub that only serves food
between 12 and 2; we sit and fume into our drinks and eat packets of
crisps in record time. A pair of Little Gulls have been frequenting
the nearby Wilstone reservoir, but that's too far for us today; even
my non-hungover feet protest at the thought. After a brief cameo from
the first swallow of summer, all that remains is a return walk down
the utterly lifeless grand union canal.

The week rolls round, and another weekend brings another birding
scheme. The traditional spoonbill sighting has been reported at Cliffe
Pools, so it's time to get the scope in the mulepack, and stuff myself
and my bike on HS1 to Gravesend. At Gravesend, I've a choice to make;
do I bike from here or wait for a connection to Higham? I opt for the former; it looks like a pretty solid bike path with a chance to link up with the Saxon Shore Way.

This is...a mixed choice. Getting out of Gravesend on the bike is
difficult. The cycle path is, indeed, excellent. The option to join
the Saxon Shore way is a foolish one; it's a dyke between the Thames
and the farmland, and the surface of it is immeasurably keen to get
stuck to all the surfaces of my bike. 

When I get nearer the reserve, I turn off on a footpath to escape the
mud hell. In fact I replace it with a twisty bramble hell, followed by
a sandy hell as I head through the arse end of a quarry. I then
proceed to attempt to enter the reserve by another tiny path that
isn't suitable for bicycles and then, having entered the reserve,
start trying to go round it the opposite way to which I'd planned.

I pause to take stock. Am I hungry? It's a possibility. I trundle up
to the top of one the reserves' marked mounds and take a seat to eat a
snack. The islands visible from here are flooded with gulls. They make
a phenomenal racket. Among them a few mediterranean gulls look
haughtily at their noisier cousins.

Refuelled, and redirected, I head to the causeway that cuts through
the reserve's multiple pools. A couple of folks are giving the second
pool on the right a good staring at. I dismount so I can have a look
at whatever they're looking at. As I do so, there's an explosive bit
of song from the scrub on my left. A brown bird with a tell-tale
rufous tail flits back into the undergrowth. Nightingale! I wasn't
expecting that! Although, according to the others, I should be -
Cliffe is supposed to be a reliable place to find them. This specimen
pops up from the bushes to sing for us once or twice more before
reverting to type and becoming invisible but still audible.

I have a good stare at the back of the flamingo pool; the usual flocks
of avocet are there, and one or two ringed plover, if I look _very_
carefully. No sign of any spoonbill; there are a few little egrets
spotted around that are doing a reasonable job of not-quite-resembling
them _just_ far away enough to cause some doubt. Spoonbills they
aren't.

I continue on towards the Thames; I'll do my usual route of causeway,
and then the potholes of death around the back of the reserve, past
black barn pools. There are _much_ better ringed plover views from the
Thames end of the flamingo pool, so I tarry there for a while. Love a
good plover. Still. Must be going. Spoonbill to not see, potholes to
be terrified by.

The potholes are as a I remember them; everywhere. At one point a
tractor appears behind me to add to the pressure; I find a wider bit
to take refuge in while it goes past. A few reed warblers chirp at me
while I wait. I consult the RSPB trail map; apparently there are two
more viewing mounds on this path that I've somehow missed. There is a
gate which looks like it might offer decent views of a bit of radar
pool that I neglected earlier, so I poke my nose over.

There are those little egrets again. Only this time, one of them is a
spoonbill! It's even putting on a show of typical spoonbill behaviour,
sweeping its bill from side to side in the water. I get set up with
the scope to take a proper look, but it's come too close to the bank
on this side, and is obscured from view. I try to get a better angle
on where the bird should be from further up the path, but by the time
I get there, it's disappeared. Oh well, it was a good view while it
lasted.

I successfully navigate the remainder of the potholes, and exit the
reserve via a more sensible route. I decline the option of pub on the
way out; I remember being looked at kinda funny in at least one
establishment along here in the past; heading straight for Higham
station to pick up the next train back to Gravesend is the
plan. Typically, I miss the half hourly service by about five
minutes. Angrily glaring at the common or garden species in the trees
behind the platform opposite does nothing to transform them into
anything more exciting.

Still, the day is still young. Not for nothing did I start early; it's
only just approaching 3pm, and some top level google maps sleuthing in
the week revealed a handy little birding trick; there's a ferry from
Gravesend across the Thames. From there, it's a short train trip (or,
assuming I miss the connection by the usual few minutes) a twenty
minute bike ride to Rainham Marshes. After a brief stop in Gravesend
for what is, even for Mcdonalds, a pretty average quarter pounder, I
board the ferry for Tilbury.

It's a genuinely excellent little boat ride, even if the banks of the
Thames aren't at their most picturesque at this point. The river is a
good width, so there's enough time to relax into the feeling of being
(almost) at sea.

We arrive at Tilbury and I immediately miss a train. It turns out it's
a twenty minute bike ride...if you know where you're going. In the
end, I bodge my way to Grays just in time to pick up the connection to
Purfleet (saving all of five minutes). I arrive at Rainham with around
half an hour to find the Black-necked Grebe that's been reported on
Aveley pool (side note: wouldn't it be great if we lived in a world
where these urban reserves could open up unstaffed?). 

The volunteers in the visitor centre doubt my claims that I can
appreciate the reserve in under half an hour, but I put on my most
charming face and convince them otherwise. I try not to get distracted
by a very showy chiffchaff as I set off; I've got ten minutes to get
to the back of the reserve, ten minutes to find this grebe and then a
further ten to get back.

A brisk walk gets me to a good viewpoint in eight minutes (hah - I
reckon I could do a full circuit in half an hour if I were so
desirous). The light could not be any less helpful; it's _right_ in
front of me, transforming everything in my view into a silhouette. All
is not lost - even in profile, I think I can probably pick out a BNG
if its visible.

Which, water pouring from my eyes, it most certainly is not. The clock
on my phone tells me my time is up, so I head back to the visitor
centre. We're not quite done yet - there's still a good hour of
daylight, and the path alongside the reserve next to the Thames is a
cycle path. I come across a bunch of fairly serious birders a
kilometre or so down the path. While most of them are now heading off,
one is hanging about in the hope of a short eared owl.

We discuss our various birding days: they've been in the area all day,
checking out the gulls at the nearby barges, walking the reserve, and
have just been checking out the river area for wheatears; there's one
just there. Introductions are made, names are immediately
forgotten. Even worse, I'm pretty confident I've met this chap before.

We hang about for a while; I briefly entertain the possibility that
from this angle the light will be good enough to discern the
grebe. It's a ridiculous notion; it would be a dot from here, even if
it was playing ball. A short eared owl does, as predicted by my new
companion, float over the reserve within fifteen or twenty minutes.

We head further down the river to have a good stare over the reserve
from a slightly different angle. On the way, my memory is jogged by my
companion's deep knowledge of Rainham, and his attachment to his
camera; I've spoken to him on the reserve before, in the hide where
you can see the kingfishers. Well, that's a relief. Perhaps I might
remember his name the next time we cross paths.

Two further birders are at this watchpoint; I feel in danger of being
the odd one out, but it turns out that honour has already been given
to the slightly less reserved gentlemen of the two we've just
encountered. This is getting a bit weird. A few straggling raptors
drift over; a couple of marsh harriers and a buzzard. A consensus is
reached that it's probably about time to head home. Rainham station is
slightly closer from here, and the way is almost entirely segregated
cycle path, so that's the way I head. A brief change on to the
overground at West Ham and a solid day of birding is done.

The next weekend finds us further out along the Thames estuary in
Leigh-on-Sea, where Emma's parents reside. There are plans for
Saturday day, but there is a small window available for a bit of
birding early on the Saturday morning.

I skulk out of the house around 6:45am. That should give me enough
time. Today's target is cuckoo, and the venue is Two Tree Island, a
landfill site that was filled long enough ago to have transitioned
back into a nature reserve. It's either a forty minute walk, or two
ten minute walks and a little wait at Chalkwell station to get
there. It turns out I am lazy; it probably helps that the station
platform at Chalkwell has a beautiful view over the giant mudflats
that extend from the beach out into the estuary.

I alight at Leigh-on-Sea and march along the raised path alongside the
waterway that separates the island from Essex proper (the Essex
mainland?). I can hear a cuckoo already. The reason I'm here is
because Two Tree tends to be a place where you can _see_ cuckoos, as
well. I cross on to the island; the Cuckoo is, by my ears, on the
Eastern half, so I take the first opportunity to turn left off the
road and into the reserve proper.

The other good thing about Two Tree is that it is compact. Within a
couple of minutes I'm near the main feature of the East side of the
Island (a small pond surrounded by reeds; at one edge, a makeshift
hide/blind sits). The cuckoo sounds very close indeed from here, but I
still can't see it. 

A few reed warblers flit around in the reeds making their
uncomfortable little scritchy noise; a whitethroat jumps around in a
tangle of bushes off to the right. "Cuckoo! Cuckoo!" yells a bird on
the treeline behind it. Not a trick of the sound then; the bird is at
most fifteen metres away - that's flat out confiding for Cuckoo. The
bird poses for long enough for me to take a couple of photos of it,
and to my surprise, is enough of a performer to cuckoo once or twice
when I work out how to take a video of it, too.

Target achieved, it's time to move on. The other hopeful I am after
today is Grasshopper Warbler; I picked one up here the last time I saw
Cuckoo here, so hopefully lightning can strike twice. I follow the
path around the South side of the island and cross the road over to
the West side of the reserve; the mixture of grassland and pockets of
bramble and stubby shrubs feels like the right place to be.

Despite a lot of standing around, the sound of a Grasshopper Warbler
reeling is remarkable only by its absence. It's a very distinctive
song, and it carries a long way; if I can't hear one, there probably
isn't one here. I'm not too downhearted; there's a couple of other
places I might be able to catch up with it over the next month or
so. It's also very hard to be downhearted when, even without a
Grasshopper, spring has arrived, and every other bird you see is a
Whitethroat, having not seen any for seven or eight months. Even if
none of them are Lesser, the pedant in me adds.

There are a couple of hides at the Western limit of the island; one of
them looks out on to a scrape where there are often some excellent
waders. I wander in to find a couple of folks already in residence. I
settle down into a seat and have a good scan. There's a good number of
Avocets, and plenty of Redshank and Oystercatcher too. A few ducks are
floating about; none of them particularly remarkable.

My two hide companions have questions: what is _that_ bird over there?
It's a redshank with a very muddy beak. What about that one?
Oystercatcher. And that one? Canada goose. I can cope with this level
of questioning all day. The problem is this: I've found two waders at
the back that definitely aren't Redshank, Oystercatcher, or
Avocet. These two folks are not going to be able to help me work out
what it is. A scope view would make things much easier, but I've left
mine back in London.

Thankfully, the two birds in question aren't in a hurry to go
anywhere. They poke about around one of the islands at the back of the
scrape, gently circuiting it. A handy Redshank flies in to sit next to
them, and gives me enough size and colour context to give me the
answer. My mysterious avians are just a tad lankier than the Redshank,
but they are much paler. In the brief moments where they are well
illuminated I'd say their legs were of a sort of grey-green hue. They
can, therefore, only be Greenshank. 

This is an excellent tick. Greenshank won't breed anywhere near here -
they pass through once in Spring on their way to breeding grounds much
further North (read: Scotland) and then again, in the Autumn, on the
way back. I explain all of this to my hide companions and they make
positive noises but are otherwise unmoved. I make some excuses about
breakfast and head out. After a third Greenshank is poking about in
the creek as I round the North-Western corner (having seen two, this
one is easier to pick out), the rest of the walk is uneventful; my
attempts to transmogrify all Whitethroat into the Lesser variety all
fail. Still. Two solid ticks and a very nice walk before breakfast.

<<There's a trip to Barnes on the Sunday to get Willow Warbler that
has no other events of note; I am tempted to omit it>>

One weekend left in April. Where to go? I'm at a bit of a loss; some
inspiration arrives in the shape of a tweet from Marylebone bird
society. They're running a trip to Two Tree Island, but they also
mention that the RSPB Central London group has a coach heading to
Pulborough Brooks on the same day.

Now, I've not been to Pulborough before, but I have seen it pop up
before during passage months on birdguides, when an interesting wader
or two drops in for a day or two. Going on the RSPB trip should also
provide some expert assistance; I'm assuming that there's going to be
some sort of group leader who knows their stuff and at least a few
other semi-serious folk along for the ride. Well, that's decided
then. I manage to get hold of the organiser of the coach, and there
are still spaces; alright, let's go for it. What possible perils could
a coach full of mixed ability birders present?

The coach leaves from outside embankment station at 8am on the
Saturday. I'm there before the coach is; I mooch about in a way that
broadcasts "too tired to interact with people right now" - this works
perfectly, and I board the coach having only had to confirm my
identity to the organiser. There's mild consternation when a family of
folk delays the set off time by turning up late; there's a pleasing
balance of "they're only five minutes away" versus "well, they know
the rules, we can't wait for everyone" on the coach; I suspect I'll
get on with these people once I'm more awake. I park myself in a
window seat and promptly fall asleep.

I wake up in a different world; what was a grey, damp view of Central
London is now a sun-kissed panorama of grassy fields and
woodlands. We're five to ten minutes out from the reserve. Well done,
sleep governor. In those ten minutes, I work out that I have neglected
to bring my RSPB membership card. Curses. In the end, the reserve
staff don't even check; the non-RSPB members have been given free
passes, so it's assumed that non-pass holders are members (accurate, I
suppose).

We're in. There's a minor delay while everyone goes to the
loo. Thankfully, just outside the visitor centre there's a decent
paved area which has a view over a good section of the reserve. A few
littlies zip back and forth. I find a Buzzard sitting on a short tree
in the edge of the woods to the left. Sharper eyes than mine (a good
sign!) find Red-legged Partridge at the back of the field below. My
first swifts of the year are scything around over the pool at the
rear of the reserve. A touch too far away to hear them; shame.

The plan of this outing now starts to take shape. We're going on a
well known route, led by a man named Andrew Peel. This is going to be
interesting; there are a good twenty of us. A few peel off with their
own itineraries in mind, but that's still a big group; half of the fun
of this is going to be seeing how this works (or not).

Once we get away from the visitor centre, the first part of the
reserve is definitely going to be focussing on little birds; it's a
mixture of scrubby bramble and light birch woodland. Whitethroat is
once again the most prevalent bird. Still no Lesser Whitethroat,
though; there are three or four people who are good enough with song
to pick it out very quickly, and they can't hear one.

Andrew marshalls the group around this area at roughly the pace I'd
choose; tarrying here and there, but not too long. It's when he
shushes a few stragglers at the back of the group that I know I'm in
the hands of a professional, though! The guilty parties quieten down
and look suitably chastised.

We do need a bit of quiet; the next section is where we're hoping to
pin down a Nightingale. How delightful to not need such an elusive
tick; I listen out for the Nightingale with reasonable fervour, but
with none of the nervous excitement that a year-tick viewing would
bring. The level of focus does, at least, yield some good views of the
year's first Bullfinches. A good bird to tick off; it's not beyond the
realms of possibility to not connect with it over a year (although
there is, thinking about it, a reliable place to see them at
Attenborough). We're treated to good views of Willow Warbler and
Blackcap in the same area. No Nightingale though.

We turn right to explore the North end of the reserve. There's another
large pool there, and a vast hide capable of supporting a group lunch
stop. On the way, there's another viewpoint over the pool. There's not
a lot in terms of waders, but the wire fence that bisects the area
from side to side is laden with hirundines; all three species are
present. House Martin is new for the year, for me.

The scoped among us set up to provide a better views; a few
enthusiasts are given some helpful tips to differentiate between Sand
Martin (brown, obvious collar, chunky), House Martin (Black (well,
blue sheen), obvious white patch on rump, chunky) and Swallow
(slimmer, red patch at top of chest, more delicate tail fork). We
spend a bit of time here watching these birds - like the first
Whitethroats of a week ago, it's the first good view of them many of
us have had for many a month, and it's marvellous to have them
back. It may not be summer yet, but the dark influence of Winter is
definitively (ok, temporarily) banished.

Onwards to lunch. Others have brought considerably more comprehensive
supplies and I am jealous. One or two common sandpipers (tick!) dotted
around the islands in the pool provide a salve to my food envy. The
giant form of a Great Egret just a few metres in front of the hide
helps too. What a neck those birds have; I wonder how fast the head
accelerates when the compact s-shape snaps straight to pick up a prey
item. A pair of linnets pops up and down in a bush on the left. There
is great excitement at the appearance of a water vole in a nearby
channel. Thinking about it, this shouldn't be a great surprise. WWT
Arundel is only a few miles downstream of here, and they're overrun
with them there, one would hope that the population would spread
around a bit.

We hang here too long for my liking; the available birding is
exhausted quite quickly after my limited supplies are, but I suppose
that's my fault for not bringing a more diverse set of snacks. I take
the opportunity to execute a sneaky wee while the rest of the group
finishes up.

Our next stop is a mound that surveys an area of what can only be
described as Sedge. Funnily enough, this would be a good place to pick
up Sedge Warbler or Grasshopper Warbler. We're at the wrong time of
day though; unless there's been constant murk and rain and the sun is
only just coming out, this time tends to be moribund for warblers. We
find a few blackcaps but nothing else.

Further along, we encounter the second 'lens-good-birding-average'
incident of the year: what is this that I've taken a photo of? It's a
greenfinch. I am mystified that these folks can spend so much on
camera kit, be clearly interested in birds, but also be so green. They
don't carry binoculars either. Odd.

The rest of the circuit is mostly uneventful; we do _hear_ a sedge
warbler in a bush off to the left of one of the paths, but despite its
proximity (it can't be more than five metres in) I can't get eyes on
it. Frustrating; other year listers will quite happily tick it just on
sound, but that's an alien concept in the rules Mum and I agree on;
you've got to see it to tick it.

One further tick awaits from the final hide of our tour; there's a
juvenile tawny owl sitting in the crook of a tree. It has few
discernible features at this stage of its life - you can pick out the
head and eyes from the grey ball of fluff, but that's about it. Again
- a good tick to have; the owls near where we live have been almost
entirely absent this year, and my confidence of picking one up at
random during the year has been decreasing.

The group tarries in the Nightingale area on the way back to the
visitor centre; I plough on; I've exhausted my food supply and these
people don't deserve to have to cope with a hungry James. One
chocolate brownie and a coffee later I am restored.

The group slowly filters in; they managed to track down a Nightingale
and had good views. Vicarious happiness abound; interesting - hadn't
realised that the success of other birders would be so contagious. It
probably helps that I've already seen one. As a bonus, it appears I
have been inducted into the "semi-serious birders" category. Or
possibly it's just that one of this group, a friendly gent named
Nigel, has decided that I need to be more closely integrated. Four of
us trundle off into the sandy woodland area that's accessible from the
car park in the hope of tracking down Woodlark; there's an area that's
being deliberately maintained in the hope of attracting them.

This trip has no success birding wise, but it's good to get to know
these members of this crew; they are a likeable bunch with great
enthusiasm for birding, tempered by, I suspect, a lot of experience of
finding bugger all.

We reconnect with the remainder of the group back at the tour bus;
Nigel ends up sitting next to me and does a remarkably good job of
distracting me from travel sickness by telling me about the works of
the West London Bird Group that he runs. Excellent - more
opportunities to go birding with people who know what they're
doing. Somehow I make it all the way back to embankment without
heaving (and, all the time, paying enough attention to keep the
conversation going). I stumble around Embankment for a while until the
world stops spinning, then get on the Northern line home. Four tick
day; new people met, no major social embarassment; jolly good.

I review the spreadsheet the next day with mixed feelings. It's not a
bad haul for April, but one or two things that I'd hoped to have seen
by now remain unticked. Reed and Sedge Warbler have both been heard
but not seen; no panic there - we'll definitely come across them in
the next month or so. No Grasshopper Warbler or Lesser Whitethroat;
more problematic - these will be around for a good few months, but
they'll sing a lot less (and generally, after May, be a lot less
visible); cause for concern. Let's overlook the lack of Lesser Spotted
Woodpecker and concentrate instead on the fortuitous finding of
Nightingale, Ring Ouzel and Spoonbill.

April total: 140. 60 to go. The cricket mantra of keeping the
scoreboard ticking over comes to mind; a couple of birds a weekend and
we'll hit 220 by the end of the year.

May arrives, and its time to catch up with Mum; both in person and
hopefully in bird count. Mum lives on the outskirts of
Nottingham. More relevantly, she is no more than five minutes away
from Attenborough Nature Reserve; probably one of the best birded
places in the middle of the country, and for good reason; it's an
excellent place. Mum has already seen all four of the warblers I
missed in April, so a weekend visit featuring a walk or two around the
reserve should bear fruit. In addition, Mum's keen to hop over to the
Peak District to a location that's a reliable source of Pied
Flycatcher.

Mum and I manage to sneak a quick morning visit to the reserve; we're
both quite early risers, our partners prefer a more leisurely start to
the weekend. We don't have long, but it's time enough to pick up Reed
Warbler and the first Common Tern of the year. Mum points out all the
places she's seen Lesser Whitethroat (and Garden Warbler) along the
way. This is the third or fourth annual performance of this "they're
usually here, and here, but of course, they aren't today, the little
gits" performance, and it loses none of its charm in repetition. One
day I'll see Lesser Whitethroat atop these little bushes near the
bridge, but today is not it.

We return to pick up the remainder of the crew and set out towards
Padley Gorge. Only Chesterfield stands in our way, and its fiendish
traffic systems are mysteriously navigable on this occasion. We park
up at Grindleford station, somehow resist the tremendous fatty smells
emanating from the cafe and cross the railway bridge.

This first part of the walk is rather strenuous; up a residential road
(track?) and then through into the start of the woods proper at the
top. On the way, we pass a serious birder, and make enquiries. Yes,
one or two Pied Flycatcher, says he, but not a lot else. Hopes for
Common Redstart and Wood Warbler had better be toned down somewhat, then.

We encounter further experts a little way in, and they give us some
more exact directions: when you reach some walls off to the right of
the path, have a look for a numbered nest box; there should be a pair
around there.

Walls are subsequently located. Are they the right walls? Perhaps we
should have asked for further identifying details. We snake our way
through them and come to a stop where it feels like there is no path
any more. At this point, we start to hear a call that we don't
know. None of us know what a Pied Flycatcher sounds like, but we've
all got a reasonable index of the other birds we'd hear in this sort
of wood, and this call sticks out. If we weren't paying attention before, we 
are now.

A nest box is located a few feet up a nearby tree. Mum squeaks: "got
one". A mild frenzy of description follows, which is hopeless for me,
because from where I'm standing it turns out there is a tree in my
way. A few steps to the left and the directions make sense, there's a
female Pied Flycatcher sitting a few feet above the nest
box. Excellent.

It's not long before the male turns up too. Both birds show off some
typical behaviour (i.e fly-catching) interspersed with visits to the
nest box, and some very photogenic perching. It becomes clear that
they aren't the only pair; there are two others a few trees back, as
well. Luxury.

We manage to peel ourselves back on to the walk a few minutes
later. Very slow progress is made; almost every bird we see (and hear,
now we know what they sound like) is another pied flycatcher; the
numbered nest boxes are a big hit. We guess we've probably seen
somewhere between seven and ten pairs by the time we emerge from the
woods at the top of the gorge (we guess our first serious birder was
too early, before the insects they feed on were active), as well as a
fair few Willow Warblers that stoutly resisted any attempts to be
turned into Wood Warblers.

On exiting the wood, the scenery opens out a bit; there's still a few
trees here and there, but mostly we've got a sort of mixed
woodland/grassland/moorland border. If we're going to see Redstarts,
I'd expect to see them here. We don't. I blame the not insignificant
numbers of picnicking tourists and the overpriced ice-cream van.

We cross the stream that cuts through the gorge and start the return
leg. This is significantly less remarkable in terms of flycatchers: we
don't see any. A moment of brief excitement is afforded when the path
plunges down to a tiny waterway that's emitted from a bridge the road
goes over at the top. The opportunity for stepping stones is declined
by Mum (dodgy hip) and Emma (solidarity) but enthusiastically taken on
by Chris and I. We are duly rewarded when a chubby brown bird that can
only be a Dipper drills up the tiny valley and perches on a set of
rocks not ten feet from those we just crossed.

Urgent signalling towards the road-route-takers follows. Mum and Emma
arrive after what seems like an eternity and we enter the "you two are
making stuff up zone" while we wait for the bird to
reappear. Thankfully, within a minute or so it does, and puts on a
reasonable hopping about on rocks performance before flying off, this
time up the gorge proper, with what looks to us like a degree of
finality.

Barring a few encounters with the usual suspects, the rest of the walk
passes without event. One rather bizarre lunch at The Chequers later,
and we're ready to head home.

The next day, we're back at Attenborough to try and find a few more of
these pesky warblers. The weather's still not on our side; what looked
grey and overcast quickly turns into heavy rain, and we take cover in
the tower hide. This would typically be a decent spot for warblers;
from the rear there's a decent grassy area that has some cracking
bramble patches. We'll have a good look once the rain stops, but until
it does, the gravel pit in front of the hide needs examining for the
pair of Garganey that were reported yesterday.

This is not an easy task - what light there is comes from behind the
pit, and there's a lot to search. Just as I give up with the
binoculars, two ducks land at around 2 'o' clock. Hmm. Hint of
eye-stripe on one of them? Perhaps the scope will make it
clearer. Hmm. Yeah, even in this deeply average light, that's a Garganey. 
And, yes, the other arrival is a Garganey too. A bit of scope tightening
to let everyone have a go later, and we've all seen a Garganey for the
year.

When the weather backs off a bit, the year's first Sedge Warbler pops
up on the other side of the hide. A welcome break from the tirade of
Reed Warblers, whose racket, while another pleasing harbinger of
spring earlier in the year, now quickly grates.

Having given up on the existence of Lesser Whitethroat, the last hope
for the day is that one of the reserve's Grasshopper Warblers might
grace us with a brief appearance. The sun comes out, and as we walk
out of the tower hide we catch a hint of a Gropper reeling back
towards the start of the marsh path. A little bit of scurrying later,
and we've joined a small team of be-anoraked birders staring at
another giant bramble patch just off to the right of the path that
heads to the Trent.

There are intermittent spurts of unmistakable Gropper, but exactly
whereabouts in this bush is unclear. And there's a lot of bush to
check. We circle around the edge of it in the hope of
triangulating. No joy. The growing anorak (they are actually all
wearing anoraks, this isn't a slur) team make themselves useful
pointing out a very cryptic Garden Warbler having a disagreement with
a pair of Blackcaps. I've never managed to clap eyes on this precise
LBJ before, and it's clear from this example why!

A good twenty minutes of staring hopelessly into brambles bears no
further fruit; we head home via the little piece of reserve behind the
visitor centre to pick up the reliable Tree Sparrows that abide there.

This early May bank holiday isn't over yet - although, given we're
eight ticks up already, perhaps we've earned a rest. A couple of
friends are heading out to North Kent for a day out; specifically,
they want to go to Herne Bay. That area of Kent is very well birded,
so despite having never been there, I know that a walk around the
coast to Reculver could yield a tick or two. A nice walk should be
possible in any case!

We get on a High Speed 1 train from Pancreas to Herne Bay, thinking
that we're probably going to be even later than the rather late 2pm we
were aiming for. Arriving, Herne is utterly rammed. We narrowly avoid
an Abba tribute band and settle down in a Turkish restaurant to take
on some food; we just got feisty over finding a toilet so blood sugar
is clearly very low. Our friends (+ dog) arrive in a similar state of
hunger, so we sojourn a little while as they make their way through a
mezze.

Some time later, we make a start along the coast. The company is
excellent, the sea views too. The birding is less good. Lots of
sparrows. After a bit of unnecessary scrambling, we climb back into
what some interpretive panels inform us is Reculver Country Park; this
looks a bit more helpful - a beautiful grassy area full of
skylarks. As I'm watching a skylark ascend, a wagtail shaped bird
flaps by overhead. What sort of wagtail? We may never know. Not grey;
tail not long enough, wrong jizz. No hope of a tick from that.

We reach Reculver itself, and are greeted by a not particularly
salubrious public house and several ice cream joints. A stop for a
beverage is unanimously passed, particularly by the dog, who
energetically makes some new friends among the other pub guests.

We have a quick look around the towers themselves. With an eye on the
time, I shelf the plan to wander around the marshes further East -
instead, we'll cut back inland and make a circuit that way instead. As
we head into the farmland, a couple of Grey Partridges give us the
eyeball; in any other year that'd probably be a tick, but they're
already accounted for by that trip to Bramfield in January.

This part of the walk manages to be more scenic than the coastal bit;
Kent lives up to its claim of being the garden of England; the light
provided by the progression of the day towards sunset is helping as
well. Some unwelcome plants have grown rather larger than my beshorted
legs would like; it's a good job I'm an adult and nettles no longer
have any effect. We trundle past a few well-to-do places with
significant barbecue capability; Emma's obviously impressed; I find
her looking at property in the area later in the day, the sure sign of
 approval.

At this point, I'm not even thinking about birds, I'm just enjoying
the walk. As we pass underneath a railway bridge and head towards a
large set of farm buildings, I hear an unusual dove like
noise. Interesting. People have described Turtle Doves as 'purring';
is this what they mean? Worth a look, in any case. It's just on the
edge of being identifiable. Is the top of that wing showing a warm
brown colouration? It could be. I can't convince myself of the id at
this distance, so I get the xeno-canto page for turtle dove up for
some audio confirmation. Unmistakable. The bird helpfully flies to a
different tree that puts the sun behind me, and I can now see enough
of its features to be absolutely certain. What an unlooked for bit of
joy; I've never seen one before.

The rest of the walk, after we leave farmland and have to pick our way
through the Eastern edge of Herne Bay, is a bit of a thankless trudge;
the dog provides some entertainment, but otherwise it's much the same
as the way out, only with more sparrows. The light at the end of the
tunnel is the promise of a very greasy meal from a fish and chip shop
back in the centre of town. We collapse into a set of plastic chairs
and enjoy our hard earned nosh. We stagger back to the station and
board the train home; excellent day out, bonus tick, fish and chips to
finish; a very good bank holiday all round.

The short week rolls by, and news of Black-winged Stilts in the Thames
estuary trickles in. They've been seen at Bowers Marsh RSPB; good -
the other options on the North are less accessible by public
transport, or just a bit of a sod to bird (I'm looking at you, Vange
Marsh). I can string a decent walk out of a visit to Bowers as well;
from Benfleet station back to Pitsea.

Duly kitted out, I set out from Benfleet. The public footpath is well
marked, but not so well maintained. Once again, I am made to regret my
choice of shorts for the second time in six days; this time,
unfortunately, thorns are involved and even at my advanced age, they
manage to cause me some damage. I take out some of my anger by
swearing at some black headed gulls for being insufficiently
interesting.

The rough ground between the station and the reserve itself is
sufficiently scrubby to hold boatloads of Whitethroat. Are any of them
Lesser? Probably, but the ones I can see are all Common. I stride
onwards; these brambles aren't going to give up a tick today, I can
feel it.

Crossing under the road to Canvey island, one enters the reserve
proper. I transition from an OS to an RSPB map and head towards the
reserve's viewing area where the Stilts have been seen. The omens are
not good. Birders are making egress from the watch point, and they are
stony faced, taciturn; paying attention to a stray Linnet or two, as
if that's the only thing of note they've seen all day. Hmm.

I reach the viewing area; the primary mood is frustration rather than
excited; no-one's clapped eyes on a Stilt all day. There's not exactly
that many places I'd expect a Stilt to attempt to hide on this series
of scrapes either. Still, plenty of other waders. Is there something
of interest hiding amongst them? Half an hour of scouring with the
scope has the answer: no. Still. Nice Avocets. A few minutes later I
become the same bad omen others were for me on the way in; the Stilts
aren't here, it's time to explore the rest of the reserve.

Some patchy rain follows me around; pesky, really - I'm not dressed
for it. Evidently no-one else is either, though; I don't see another
soul as I traverse the reserve's boundary path clockwise. A visit to
the saline lagoon provides an opportunity for a covert wee, but little
else. I return to the circular path and head towards what, from the
main viewing area, was the rear area of the lake. 

There's a neat little reedbed channel alongside the path; a few Reed
Warblers are squawking in it. And, if my ears don't deceive me, at
least one Bearded Reedling. Oho. Now I just need to clap eyes on
it. In this channel, that seems hopeful; there's only three to four
metres of reeds and they aren't dense - oh, in fact, there they are; a
pair of them, to be precise. They're in a confiding mood; almost
getting close enough for a photo from my phone, but then flitting back
to the end of the channel and then starting back towards me. I spend a
good ten minutes watching this performance; it's the most interesting
thing to happen since the thorny path at the beginning, and I am
restored by it.

It's a good job - the next twenty minutes of walk is fruitless; an
opposite view of the scrape yields no further interest, and the lumpy
parts at the back of the reserve hold nothing of interest. There are
some vocal cuckoos in the distance, but I suspect in the distance is
where they'll stay. I am wrong. As I walk into Great Pound viewpoint,
there's one sitting not ten feet away from my in a spiky bush. It
cuck-coos at me angrily and flaps off. I instinctively cuck-coo back
at it. A second bird, further back, responds in kind (to whose call,
it isn't clear; it's not like I can ask). A little further round the
walk, my presence disturbs what I can only assume is the same two
birds; they flap off West in search of even quieter pastures (I still
haven't seen anyone since leaving the watch point).

I pick my way around the remainder of the path, clap eyes on the first
humans I've seen for an hour and a half on the road out of the
reserve, and then turn left to pick my way through some very soggy
fields on the way to Pitsea. In a fit of madness, I don't get on the
first train home from there, but plough on to have a look at Vange
Marsh. This is a mistake. The lagoon, previously a mixed area of
scrape where I've seen Wilson's Phalarope and Little Stint, is covered
in algae, and the only thing alive on it are Mute Swans. For future
reference, I have a good explore of the easternmost area of the site,
in case something happens in future and I don't want to spend half an
hour wondering how the hell to traverse the reserve.

I head back to Pitsea for the train home with an increased amount of
respect for the birders whose patch Vange Marsh is. I wonder where
those stilts went.

The next day brings news of a hopefully more reliable bird. Birdguides
is showing a female Smew on a lake near Cheshunt; the description has
'still' in it, and if I look on the website, it's been sporadically
reported for some weeks. It's quite surprising for this bird to still
be in the UK at this point - they are typically winter visitors only.

This ought to be a slam dunk tick. The instructions are detailed; the
bird is always found on the same lake on a nature reserve of what I
can only assume is old gravel pits (it's always old gravel pits). The
lake is a pleasant ten minute walk from a well serviced station
nearby.

In addition, it's a duck. So a.) it should be big enough to see, even
at distance and b.) the opportunities for it to disappear into a bush
forever are small. Wildfowl are often the gateway to birding as a
result of these two features, I feel.

We perform the necessary transport dance; the change at Seven Sisters
on to the National Rail network is as under construction as it always
seems to be. We alight at Cheshunt and spend a moment getting our
bearings. A nearby family is off on the same walk as us; their
youngest daughter has other ideas though and is protesting loudly
about it. As we finally get underway, it turns out she was successful
- the same family have turned around and we pass them in the opposite
direction. Either that or they forgot something, or this walk is
_much_ shorter than we thought. Tears before bedtime, we expect.

A five minute walk down the River Lee Navigation, we reach a bridge,
and cross over. The path continues between the lake on the left and
the river at this point, but it's the lake on the left we're here for,
so we make a stop in an angler's spot on the shore to see what we can
see.

The answer is a lot of Coots, and a few Great Crested
Grebes. Unexpectedly, it appears some patience will in fact be
required; the Smew is not immediately visible - I think I was
expecting it to be putting on a performance within ten or twenty
metres of this little viewpoint. Emma and I both put on our serious
birder faces and set about making a more serious examination of the
more distant parts of the lake.

There is a hint of something Smew like at the back - something
non-grebe and non-coot is swimming about and occasionally diving. Its
colouration rules out it being a Tufted Duck; but is the level of
detail with binoculars good enough to rule it into being a Smew? I
think it probably is; there's nothing else that really looks like
them, and I'm pretty confident I can see the chestnut forehead that
gives a female Smew its 'redhead' nickname. 

Now I just need to tell Emma where it is. This is unexpectedly
tricky. The border of the lake's vegetation is too homogenous to offer
landmarks, and the Smew itself is unhelpfully spending at least half
of its time underwater. In the end, I daisy chain a description from
the front of the lake to the back, via some very specific Coots and a
very helpful Black-headed Gull. No, to the left of that grebe. The
other left. No, not that far; wait a bit, it's underwater. No, I'm not
making it up. There, it's there. Got it? Excellent.

Having successfully exited the making it up phase, we set the scope up
to have a better look and generally preen a little at having achieved
this trip's tick without having had to spend too much effort, get
rained on, or have an argument about food or directions. 

What now, though? We're reasonably confident that our Smew will be the
only tick of the day, so we meander around fairly aimlessly. We manage
to find a couple of hides that look over a scrape; not a lot is about
- a Pheasant is the only bird worthy of comment, despite some stolid
searching for sandpipers. Some attractive grassland provides some
pleasant walking; much scanning of fenceposts for migrants comes to
nothing. Further discoveries: a disc golf course (one for another
time), a deeply annoying dead end and, finally, a rather dilapidated
route to Waltham Cross (the nearest station post reversing out of the
dead end). Not a bad trip; at a different time of year this might be
worth a more serious visit!

Our next trip has been in the calendar for a long time. There's a
royal wedding happening in the vicinity of London, so we're heading
North to be as well clear as any related idiocy as possible. We're
taking Thursday and Friday off to make a long weekend of it, and we've
been suitably organised to get some seriously cheap train tickets (to
Newcastle upon Tyne).  Our outbound train renders our organisation
moot by being more than an hour behind schedule; we get a complete
refund of our £30 tickets and lose an hour of sleep; not sure how good
a deal that is. A short tax ride later and we reach the new abode of
the Dixons (Kate and Steve). To bed! For we rise at 6:30 for 7.

The next morning arrives and we're and in another taxi on the way back
to the station; we need to be on the Hexham train that leaves just
before 8. We've arranged to go on a tour of the North Pennines with
Martin of Northern Experience Wildlife Tours, and that's where we're
going to start. Our main targets are grouse: Black (tricky) and Red
(should be easy). We know little to nothing about where to find the
former, so we thought we would enlist professional help.

After a short period of uncertainty (we don't know what Martin looks
like, or what he'll be driving), Martin appears in a well-labelled
vehicle, we get in, and immediately we're off up into the hills. We're
in good hands - Martin car-birds as enthusiastically as we do; we're
already a decent birding team after only a few minutes.

We make our first stop near the crest of one of the numerous hills,
and stare over the Drystone wall into the field beyond. A Curlew
trills as it circles upwards at the left hand side. I feel unsuitably
warm and dry; that sound is more often a harbinger of being on the
coast (usually in Wales) on a cold grey day with squally showers. We
get out of the car to have a look around, and that starts to work on
the temperature part of that, at least.

I've given this field a good scan and found a great many Lapwings,
some Oystercatchers and a couple more Curlew. Martin does rather
better and finds two Black Grouse sitting on the the wall at the rear
of the field. Well. That was quick. It's quite nice to find the target
bird this early - it takes the pressure off the rest of the trip, we
can relax into it and enjoy the scenery a bit more.

The ensuing drive yields a great many Meadow Pipits, and, as we get
higher, sporadic Red Grouse. These all attempt the same trick as the
Grey Partridges from January; getting as low to the ground as possible
once they feel under threat. They have mixed success; the ones on the
near side of the fences and walls adjoining the road aren't really
afforded enough cover to make it work and end up looking rather
foolish. Those on the moorland disappear without trace.

Our next major stop is at Cow Green reservoir. There are plenty of Red
Grouse here too, but it's the moorland flora that is most interesting;
there are some things that grow here that are not found anywhere else
in the UK. After a bit of encouragement we even manage to find one or
two of them, and, even more remarkably, don't immediately tread them
into oblivion.

We walk as far as the dam of the reservoir, then take a left,
descending down the torrent being emitted from it. This is bolted-on
Dipper territory. A Grey Wagtail immediately pops up to confirm this,
but strangely, of Dipper there is no sign. An otherworldly raptor
squeak disturbs the otherwise watery soundscape, but we can't pick it
up; a chap on the way down had seen a Peregrine, perhaps it was
that. We stare at a few possible Dipper spots without success before
heading back to the car park for a brief picnic.

As the day wanes, Martin takes us back to a site where he's hoping to
find us a Black Grouse lek. It's in a beautiful valley with mostly
undisturbed grassland on both sides. There's an area next to the
stream at the bottom of the valley that usually acts as the setting
for the lek. We park up in a spot near the bridge at the bottom of the
valley and wait.

Not a lot happens. The Meadow Pipits that have been our constant
companions look on from nearby fenceposts, confused. A Golden Plover
skips over at speed, peeping. One or two Curlew make their presence
known. I manage to spot a bird of prey just as it starts bombing it
down the valley towards us; by the time it gets into identifiable
range it can only be a Peregrine.

No lek today, it seems. Our final stop is another, steeper walled
valley, which manages a Common Sandpiper, a Redshank and a playful
Wheatear or two. Still no Dipper; they're obviously all hiding
today. Back to the car - time to call it a day. Martin, handily, is
heading back past Newcastle so drops us off at the Dixons'.

After a united effort phone-nagging from Emma, Kate and I, Steve
returns from work. We shove all manner of useful bedding into a car
(note to self: shoving large amounts of bedding into a small car can
in fact make a journey more comfortable, not less) and set off North.
Kate's side of the family have a place in Beadnell Bay that they've
kindly let us borrow for a couple of nights.

It's a drive of two halves - the first, a speedy but forgettable jaunt
up the A1. The second; a gentle mosey around quiet country roads as
the sun sets. What a treat to be driven around all day! Despite a
concerted campaign of snacking on the way, a trip for further supplies
is deemed necessary before we bed in for the night, so Beadnell is
temporarily bypassed in favour of Seahouses. Parking is difficult, so
a daring drop off manoeuvre of Emma and Kate is performed. I stick
around to keep Dixon company. By which, I mean, to mischievously
disappear off to the pub in the harbour for a quick pint (well, it
_was_ the only place we could park). A quick bonus tick is obtained
(every time I've been here there have been Eider in the harbour and
this visit is no exception).

After a brief period of amusing vexation (a WhatsApp message arrives
"Oi, husbands. Where are you?"), our respective other halves appear
with supplies, and we head for Beadnell to consume our co-operatively
sourced pizzas in excellent spirits.

The next day, we're back in Seahouses. In a hurry. We're booked on the
10am boat to Staple Island. At around half past nine, we read the
small print on the booking that reckons we should attempt to be there
around half an hour before that time, i.e now. Much haste ensues. "I'm
in the car" is shouted at various times to chivvy folks along. Steve,
in the rush, forgets his binoculars. Honestly.

We career back into Seahouses with moments to spare, only to be told
that the boat isn't going to land on Staple Island at all - there's
too much swell, and it isn't safe. We're advised to try the boat just
after 12 instead; alrighty then. We rearrange our plans; the afternoon
trip to Bamburgh now becomes the morning trip to Bamburgh. 

The Grace Darling RNLI museum is duly visited (Steve, Kate and I wait
outside for several hours while Emma reads every single item of text
within it, true to form), and the castle (universally agreed to be
overpriced) is gawped at from the car park. We return to Seahouses in
time to pick up lunch items from Trotter's Family Bakers (enough for
four people for under a tenner; we are gobsmacked) and then pile back
to the harbour in plenty of time to catch up with the later sailing.

The boat heads out towards Staple Island, stopping off to look at the
seal colony on the way. I make a minor nuisance of myself by pointing
out a few Puffins and Gannets (both right next to the boat, phwoar)
before the man in charge of the PA system does; I can't _quite_ tell
if the rebuke I receive is in good cheer or not so I take the safe
option of being quieter. We get a good look at the stacks of Staple
Island from the boat; the flat sections of the cliffs are covered in
Guillemots, Razorbills and Kittiwakes. The smell and the noise vie for
the award of 'most in your face'. Oddly, I find that acrid guano smell
quite relaxing - it hasn't got anything like the immediate heaving
power of, say, dog poo.

It's only when we've circuited more than two thirds of the island that
I realise that there is a subtle difference to the later sailing - it
lands on Inner Farne, not Staple Island. That's mildly upsetting as
the views of puffins are superior on the outer island, but this might
actually be better for the bird list. We've already seen all three
auks, plus Fulmar, Kittiwake and Gannet - Staple Island will only give
us better views of those birds. Inner Farne, on the other hand, will
get us both of Arctic and Sandwich Tern; neither of which are too
tricky to find across the year, but why not find them today?

We alight on Inner Farne and are not immediately attacked by hordes of
angry Arctic Terns. We guess that only starts to happen once the
chicks are hatched; the last time we were here a couple of weeks later
in the year. A circuit of the island is made - we pick up Rock Pipit
as well a both of the tern species we were after. I spend a while
trying to photograph Fulmars in flight; good practice, but no good
results. We pause for a brief nap by the picnic tables near the
lighthouse while Emma introduces herself to some nesting Eider
ducks. One gentle walk to the jetty later, and, uh, is that our boat
leaving? Oh. Whoops. I guess we'd better do another circuit then. One
more brief nap and attempt at Fulmar-snapping later, we manage to
board an alternative boat home. It turns out we errored correctly -
for this one encountered a pod of dolphins on the way back to the
harbour, so we get a bonus display from them as we go.

We're not quite done for the day - we've got one Tern species left to
find. The National Trust look after a reserve at Long Nanny, which,
conveniently, lies a half hour walk from Beadnell Bay. We set off
along the beach in the hope of catching them before it gets dark.

We reach the part of the beach where there are a great many signs
warding us inland - the parts of the beach where Brunton Burn ebbs
into the sea is an area reserved for breeding birds, and humans are
kindly asked to stay off it. One curiously dressed individual has
decided these signs aren't for him and marches obstinately straight
across. We can't work out if he's drunk or stoned; hopefully the birds
won't have minded his incursion too much.

As we head off the beach, we enter a small village of Stonechats;
delightful. Our next landmark is the bridge across the Burn, and then,
with a bit of luck, there'll be a warden on duty at the reserve who
can point us at some Little Terns.

On the way to the bridge from the beach, there's a distraction. A lamb
has managed to get itself out of a collection of fields and is in some
distress. I take a laissez faire attitude: if it can get out, it can
get back in. Unfortunately, both Dixons are scout leaders, and this is
not a situation they can allow to continue. Just before we start
attempting to corral the lamb into a corner, however, I spot a pale
shape floating off South at the back of the fields. Barn Owl! I try,
unsuccessfully, to distract anyone else from the lamb before it
disappears; the best anyone else gets is a fleeting glimpse as it
ghosts off into the distance.

After a few failed capture attempts, the team splits in two: Emma and
I head off to the reserve before it gets dark, Steve and Kate go after
the lamb. I wonder out loud if we'll ever see them again.

We cross the bridge and scoot into the reserve. There is indeed a
warden, equipped with the usual scope. A lot of chat follows, but none
of it is tern related, so I get my own scope set up and have a stare
down at the large group of terns sitting on the edge of the
beach. There are, handily, two disparate groups, and the one slightly
further away is a bundle of perhaps twenty Little Terns; I can just
about pick out the beak colouration from here, and they are tiddly in
comparison to the mixture of Common and Arctic Terns in the group to
the immediate right. Emma and I swap roles; I do the talking for a bit
while she has a look at the terns. To our surprise, the Dixons then
arrive, having successfully deposited the stray lamb back in a field
(it isn't clear which). The Dixons proceed to have an identical
conversation with the warden, which, for everyone other than them, is
completely hilarious. Eventually we extricate ourselves from the
warden and head back to Beadnell by the light of our mobile phones; we
really did let it get a bit too late.

The Saturday is spent gently lazing around in Beadnell; no further
ticks are acquired. We eventually return to Newcastle to allow for the
completion of some transactions related to beds. Emma and I make
ourselves scarce while this occurs; it's clearly been a source of
domestic tension and we won't be able to resist stirring if we hang
around. Sunday has possibilities - a walk along Hadrian's wall (Kate
and I angrily stomp past some charity walkers whose lack of pace
offends us) is augmented with a trip to have a look at Grindon Lough
on the way back; there's an American Wigeon being sporadically
reported there. We can't find it despite some pretty enthusiastic
searching, and away to a nearby pub for a refreshing beverage instead.

There isn't quite time for the length diversion up to Kielder for
Osprey, so we head back to the city to avoid missing our train
home. Which is already an hour delayed by the time it reaches
Newcastle; voiding the remaining value of our tip-top planning ahead!
Still. Four excellent days with friends in the North have been had,
several ticks were achivered, and all exposure to the royal wedding
has been avoided. Both Emma and I undertake a victory nap on the
journey home.

A successful May; so much so that the late Bank holiday is dedicated
to fossils rather than birds; the Little Terns on the 18th end up
being the last tick of the month!

May total: 166. I seriously consider trying to plot the log curve in
the spreadsheet to find out if we get to 200 in time.

June begins with a trip out to Cambridgeshire, ostensibly to visit
family. They do live conveniently near some good birding spots
though. We obtain transport in North London - a red Fiat Panda via
easycar - and drive up on the Friday night. The drive is remarkably
quiet; having set off at 7pm I was expecting to hit the "let's all get
out of London for the weekend" mayhem, but we make pretty decent
progress and arrive in Chippenham not too much more than an hour and a
half later.

Remarkably, I'm up in time to walk the dogs. Must be something to do
with the not-drinking. Dad and I go for a march around Chippenham
Fen. The first part of the walk is where all of the skylarks in the UK
live, from what I can work out. I can see why - most of what I can see
is long undisturbed grass; perfect for ground nesting birds. They're
remarkably tame, too - many of the birds peck about on the path until
we're just a couple of feet away. It feels almost a little like
trespassing.

Eventually we cut left out of the grassland and onto a path that
leads between two hedges. On one side is the fen proper - there are
reeds, and, Dad claims, a Marsh Harrier, most mornings. We cut right
to have a look at an old farm building. "There's often a barn owl
sitting at the back" says Dad. "Doesn't look like it-" WHOOSH. A barn
owl rockets out of the open face of the building, as if launched by a
ballista. It passes at most ten feet away from us, and I do some loud,
surprised exclaiming, and feel bad for having disturbed it. Well, that
was exciting. Dad has obviously planned this walk well, as just as we
reach the end of it, the fabled Marsh Harrier floats over.

We reach home; there are some signs of life from Emma. Breakfast, and,
eventually, an exit towards our first proper site of the day:
Lakenheath RSPB. Not before we've had an argument about whether we
left in an unnecessary rush, though. Thankfully, the left-behind
clothing items turn out to be rendered unimportant by an improvement
in the weather.

We get to the reserve, and immediately miss a Red-backed Shrike. The
finder has pictures, but the bird, once found, disappears forever,
despite a solid effort by a bundle of excited birders. It's only later
on that I discover I already follow the finder on twitter;
[here](https://twitter.com/sh4rpy/status/1002968249552850944)'s the
bird we missed.

Oh well. That would have been a bonus, but it definitely isn't what
we're here for. We're a bit late, but Lakenheath's Hobbies are the
thing we've come to see. Yes, we could see them elsewhere, but why not
see how _many_ we can see at once?

Lakenheath is a long, thin reserve - a five minute walk from side to
side, but a good forty minutes walk from visitor centre to the
furthest viewpoint (if you don't stop). We stop a lot to have a good
stare at mostly unrewarding reedbeds. Well, that's unfair - just as
earlier I was in the land of the Skylark, Lakenheath is the land of
the Reed Bunting. One pops up from one set of reeds and down into
another every few seconds; we get tired of remarking on it, it's so
consistent. 

After a while, a substantially bigger bird looms past to our
right. Bittern! Bittern, flying in the sun! Not skulking in a reed bed
100+ metres away! It makes a thorough inspection of the watery area it
took off from, before deciding that a change of hiding place is called
for, and dropping into some reeds ahead of us. We're still getting
over this when it happens again five or so minutes later.

Did I mention the Cuckooing? When we aren't trying to ignore Reed
Buntings or getting buzzed by Bitterns, it's all we can do to not
scour all possible perching points for them. Unlike the birds I've
found at Two Tree Island though, these ones are more cryptic, using
the poplar plantations to conceal themselves. While scanning for one
though, I do pick up our first Hobby alighting on one such poplar. Not
a tremendous view; hopefully the viewpoint at Joist Fen will have
better.

A brief stop in a hide (brief enough to realise there are no seats,
and no chance of movement - this is a birding group who have just sat
down for their lunch), our third Bittern encounter (we're used to it
by this stage) and a flyover Cuckoo (good to clap eyes on one) later,
we reach the viewpoint.

Upwards of fifty Hobby can be seen from here, on a good
day. Evidently, this is not one of those days. I was hoping for _at
least_ two or three hunting dragonflies above the reedbed, but even
that, it seems, was too optimistic. I wonder if it is too hot, or too
cold, or too soon after rain. After a brief sulk, I decide I am going
to see another Hobby by sheer will. Far flung horizons are sought out
with the scope. A distant heron is scrutinized; could it be standing
in front of a hobby? No.

In the end, I remember some advice from the last Hobby related
conversation I had: "Look up". Now we're getting somewhere. There's a
bunch of swifts directly above us. A little above them, though, are
three birds that are unmistakably of the Hobby variety. A bit more
eye-straining yields four or five more - all gently sweeping along
what I'd guess is the path of the river, traced a couple of hundred
metres above the waterline. Emma is (perhaps rightfully) unimpressed;
good numbers, but a pretty shabby view.

The sun is definitely out now, and we are hot. A flat walk back along
the river bank is called for. We're obviously hungry, as we get
unnecessarily cross with the uneven ground. We have another
speculative look for the shrike when we near the visitor centre but it
still won't pop up again.

Our next stop is Weeting Heath. Correction. Our next stop is
*lunch*. There's a pub that has reasonable ratings in
Hockhold-cum-Wilton, we'll try there. Nope, chalk up another casualty
to the "pubs that serve lunch for only five minutes on a Saturday"
fail. Thankfully there's a village store with no such qualms about
people eating lunch after 2pm, so we feast on cobs in the car
instead. Delicious.

Weeting Heath is only a short drive from here. There is disagreement
between our information sources as to which side of the road the
visitor centre (and more importantly the car park) is on. A gentle
approach gives us enough time to spot the car park (on the right, for
the record), we park up and head into the visitor centre.

The visitor centre is small but functional; the person taking the
money is also the person that knows where everything is. Beyond the
mildly icky feeling that I'm paying for bird information, this is, at
least, efficient. We follow the advice we've received and head towards
the West hide, where two Stone Curlew have apparently been putting on
a bit of a show.

We reach the hide. It is empty. Not a good omen. Still, the view is
beautiful; a rolling view of the heathland, bordered on two sides by
forest. A Curlew (Eurasian; the first time I've been required to refer
to it as such) flaps over the right hand edge.

Despite the lack of occupants, it turns out the advice was
correct. Near some odd looking equipment (some sort of remotely
operated camera? it isn't clear) there are a couple of birds looking
awkward. These are Stone Curlews, it's clear, even just with
binoculars. The scope offers a better view - the manic, beady eye is
now obvious, and the scuttling around is too. What odd creatures they
are. Are they waders? I suppose they are, given where they are in the
bird book, but what would you say is their nearest wadery relative?
Perhaps some sort of giant grass plover? It's not clear. We have a
great time watching them poke about in front of us; having not seen
them before it's a treat to pick them up so simply and so well.

We tear ourselves away in the end - the possibility of Woodlark or
Tree Pipit in the woods on the other side of the road is just enough
of a temptation. That turns out to be a red herring; conversations
with birders returning from the route lower our expectations
appropriately, thankfully. An encounter with a distant Song Thrush is
the best we manage. Our main achievement is to follow the occasionally
ill-signed path almost all the way around this area; when we near the
road again we fashion our own escape route through an area where the
nettles are a bit thinner. The Yellowhammer that sang at us as we
crossed the road the first time is still going, but we can't pinpoint
where it is; possibly due to the level of focus we're investing in not
getting run over.

We safely return to the car. It is hot. We get through the last of our
water and snacks and have a breather; we've done a fair amount of
walking at these two reserves with non-trivial baggage. Should we have
a look at the East hide?  No. Communications are reaching us from the
rest of the family that they are heading home from their day's
outings, and that a barbecue will likely be imminent. We drive back
via Thetford Forest (with a brief look at Lynford Arboretum's car
park (nice Grey Wagtail), for future reference).

The Sunday brings no birding opportunities, and we head home after a
pleasant lunch. To Hobby and Stone Curlew, we also add a third tick -
one attached itself to my left leg, presumably on the Saturday
morning. It hasn't done a great job of feeding though; it's still a
pinprick. I follow the recommended tweezers approach; it seems to
work, Lyme disease will hopefully not follow.

The next weekend comes and goes; friends are seen, but not birds. I do
my very best to ignore BirdGuides. The weekend after, we're back in
Beeston; Julie (Aunt, usually found in New Zealand) is over for a bit,
and this is the only time we might manage to intersect. The standard
trip to Attenborough is made; _still_ no Lesser Whitethroat or
Grasshopper Warbler (both now thoroughly in their invisible phase),
but a helpful Green Sandpiper puts in an appearance on the ridge and
furrow area. Even if it does elude anything but the most fleeting of
views. 

We make a trip up to Bramcote to see if we can find a more visible
Yellowhammer than Weeting's elusive one from a fortnight ago. Mum
reliably picks up Yellowhammer near Hemlock Scout Camp Site. This
never ceases to amaze me, as it's a _tiny_ area of farmland, trapped
on one side by the A52 and all other sides by bits of Beeston and
Bramcote. This place has some additional memories for me, as I once
(inexplicably) came third in some sort of scout cross-country
event. To this day I maintain I must have taken some short cut,
possibly guided by a grinning parent who knew the area rather better
than most of the competitors.

The weather is annoyingly grey - the clouds show no sign of abating,
and there's an occasional gusty wind that makes me think a layer on
top of a jumper might have been sensible. Still, some immediate
positive signs: in a scratchy field just beyond where we've parked, a
collection of Linnets are feeding, and some Goldfinches are hopping
about in the hedgerow bordering the right hand edge of the field.

A few further Linnets and Goldfinches join the crowds; we spend a bit
of time making sure that's what we are. Chris stops us: he's heard a
Yellowhammer. He reckons it's in the same hedgerow as the Goldfinches,
and finds something perching that he reckons is it. We misinterpret
his directions and tell him off; it's obviously another
Goldfinch. Then we think about it a bit and find the Yellowhammer he's
looking at. Excellent. It sings its heart out for us for a good ten
minutes, then we decide to move on.

A few Stock Doves clinging on to the chimneys of a rather delightful
looking house and a nose bleed from Chris are the only other events of
note before we head home in search of warmth and lunch.

A brief review of June reveals a threadbare cupboard contaning four
ticks only, bringing us to 170 for the year. That's not
great. Thankfully, on June 29th, we're heading up to Scotland for nine
days of touring around. We've a guide book, four OS maps and a [this
absolute gem](https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/0956987656) of a
site guide to help us.

The plan is to drive from Inverness up to the North Coast, then down
the West coast, overnighting at various campsites. Depending on how
long that takes, we'll improvise with whatever time we have left.

This is a bold plan; Emma and I have camped before, but only for a
night or two; this holiday is going to involve up to eight nights in a
row. How we'll cope with this is anyone's guess; a test erection of
the tent in the back garden only generated one mild argument (over how
to put the tent away without getting the dry bits wet), so I'm
unusually optimistic.

We spend the first night in a modest B&B near the airport - we arrive
too late to get much further, and even the drive to this place is
borderline entertaining, along considerably tight roads in pitch
darkness.

The next morning we are up and about...reasonably early - we've got a
pre-booked shop to pick up from Tesco, and, it turns out, some
additional camping related items to pick up from a local Go
Outdoors. From there, we finally make a start, driving North out of
Inverness on the A9. As we cross the Beauly Firth, I start to
relax. The year _outside_ birding's been taking its toll; it's a
marvellous sensation to feel some of the layers of stress shedding
away, and being replaced by excitement.

We've been to the Black Isle before - so we skip the Black Isle
Brewery tour (worth a visit if you're in the are, the heather honey
one is very nice) and Canonry Point (cold, windy, impossible to park,
no sign of promised cetaceans) and head instead to RSPB Fairy
Glen. Gordon (the author of the book) tells us this is a great place
for a Dipper. Yes, we have Dipper already, but one should never turn
down an opportunity to see another. We also have no idea how good
Gordon's advice is going to be; this is an ideal test.

We trot off up the path; we've gone barely 100m before a Dipper pops
up for us. Excellent. Ten points to the book. Bonus - the popularity
of this walk means it is accustomed to people, and doesn't immediately
piss off upstream, as Dippers are wont. We spend an inordinate amount
of time taking what turn out to be fairly average photos (the light
wasn't tremendous, in our defence) before deciding that making
further progress North is more important to us than the remainder of
the walk up to the falls.

Did we mention the weather? It is _spectacular_. As a result, the
views over the firth from the remaining route to Cromarty are
phenomenal. From Cromarty we're going to get the ferry over to
Nigg. 

This is somewhere between entertaining and terrifying. Before the
ferry even arrives I've got myself into a state - having parked the
car rather lackadaisically I realise there are enough road markings to
tell me I am in totally the wrong place. Escaping it will require
something akin to reverse parking; my least favourite manoeuvre,
particularly in a car I don't know, and this car, in addition, has one
of those _useless_ proximity sensors that goes into
heart-attack-fetch-the-defibrillator mode when the sensor is briefly
washed over by a summer zephyr. 

The ferry turns up. It carries two cars. Assuming you can park them
within about 1mm of each other. Getting on to the ferry is no great
drama; we're well directed by the steward. I put the handbrake on with
great glee, exit the car and enjoy the ride across, safely separated
from the more social side of the boat by the two cars on board. I'm in
denial about what's going to have to happen at the other end; I am
inventing mechanisms by which the boat will magically flip around on
mooring so I can drive off the same way I drove on, i.e in first gear,
rather than reverse.

No such luck. Worse, we have to watch some stereotypically efficient
Germans easily manhandle their giant SUV off first. In the end, it
isn't as tricky as I'd feared - one only needs to reverse straight
off, and do it slowly to let the weight of the boat keep the ramp
reasonably steady. Barring one non-actionable piece of advice from the
co-driver, we make it off the ferry alive, and make quick work of the
short drive to RSPB Nigg Bay.

This is a marvellously simple reserve; a small car park, 150m of path
to a hide. Excellent interpretive panels. Before we get to
that though, lunch. Cool Spanish omelette in burning hot sunshine. Perfect. Two
or three Yellowhammer serenade us while we eat. The beginning of a long search
for Whinchat begins - I could easily imagine one in the foliage on the
other side of the road, or on the telephone wires. No joy though.

Once we've finished our car based feast, we trundle down the track to
the hide, accompanied by Linnets and Reed Buntings. The hide is glass
walled, and, as a result, stiflingly hot. No-one has told this part of
Scotland that the weather is supposed to be terrible all the time.

The view from the hide is marred by another side effect of the weather
- anywhere with significant land between us and the water has a
seething heat haze on it. The bunch of waders on the far shore are
rendered unidentifiable. I'd guess mostly Curlew and Redshank
based on size, but they could all be Long-billed Dowitcher for what we
can see. Giving up on birds on the ground, I look up. Gordon claims we
should see Osprey here, and, unlike Dipper, that would be a tick.

There is a bird of prey flopping about at the end of the channel that
runs on the landward side of the sea wall. In the moments where it's
above the heat haze, but below the horizon, its lighter parts indicate
it is an Osprey. This is borderline unbelievable. Other site guides we've read
offer almost guaranteed disappointment; Gordon, so far, is two for
two.

Back to the A9. Another gorgeous crossing follows, this time across
the Dornoch Firth. Our next stop is another bridge; or maybe it's more
of a causeway. Yes, we're at Loch Fleet. There's only a limited amount
of exploring to do here, but we make a good go of it. First, we poddle
across the smaller bridge: Lots of swallows zipping around it, Siskins
mobbing some well tended birdfeeders in a garden on the other
side. 

Returning to the other side, we get the scope on the contents of
the muddier side of the Loch, which is festooned with Curlews. We
spend a lot of time getting very excited by a completely
unidentifiable bird sitting on the mud, until it stands up and reveals
it is a juvenile Black-headed Gull with most of its face covered in
blood.

Just as we're rolling out of the car park, three birds of prey float
in. Oh balls. Those are Ospreys! The car is ditched, optics are
fetched out again and a less heat haze mangled view of Osprey is duly
had. Phwoar.

The next stop isn't much further as the crow flies - the car park to
access it, is, however; we drive all the way Golspie only to do a 300
degree turn back towards Littleferry. Believe it or not, we're still
on the same nature reserve. This side is considerably more
wooded. Gordon claims Redstart and Crossbill are possibilities here,
as well as even more Ospreys. A beautiful walk through the woods
yields, amusingly, two more of the third only; and these Ospreys we
_hear_ as well as seen. Woodland birds are a bit thin on the ground; a
small band of Long-tailed Tits and some very proud Chaffinches.

That's enough Loch Fleet - we're starting to get into late afternoon,
and we promised ourselves that we'd get to the campsite and pitch in
time for some dinner. We head back towards the Mound end of the
reserve, but this time, turn North West along the A839 towards Lairg.

This is an _unbelievably_ scenic road; it follows the River Fleet's
valley back up into the the hills until it disappears under a
forest. It also appears to be home to a double digit percentage of the
UK's Pied Wagtails. They are all over the place!

Our first campsite is just North of Lairg, [Pondside
Camping](https://www.pondside.co.uk/). Emma ferrets out someone from
reception to pay, we drive into what we guess is an area we can pitch
and get the tent up. Excellent work, all round.

We realise that, given it's 6pm, we have another four to five hours
of daylight. That's more than enough time for another solid bit of
exploring, so we set out towards the Falls of Shin. According to all
of our sources, there should be: a.) a waterfall, b.) salmon jumping
up it and c.) a nice walk in the woods.

The capitalisation, it turns out, was warranted. We were expecting a
car park and a (probably already closed) cafe, but everything is shiny
and new, there's a visitor centre worthy of the name and a restaurant
attached to it that _almost_ manages to tear us away from the picnic
we've got ready in the car. This is the sort of place I can imagine a
coach tour turning up; I'm suddenly very glad we aren't in the school
holiday period.

We decide to explore the falls to check the veracity of the salmon
claim. We are sceptical; fish jumping, we suspect, only occurs when Grizzly 
Bears and a BBC wildlife camera team is present. To our great surprise, salmon are
demonstrably (if intermittently) trying to jump up the falls; we see
one within the first couple of minutes. It's quite something! The fish
are not small - a good couple of feet long, I'd guess, and they often
stay airborne for a good second or so, thrashing at the air
ineffectively. Emma makes some excited "wheeee" noises. We guess that
under the surface, more success is had - each fish we see go airborne
seems to go backwards. We spend a good fifteen minutes failing to
photograph this event before deciding we really need to eat some food.

Back up the ramps to the car park, where there is a well tended picnic
area for this very purpose. After a quick lie down in the sun (I've
been driving all day, and I'm still not _totally_ relaxed; I've found
that being connected to the ground in as many places as possible
helps), we examine the interpretive panels in hope of figuring out a
suitable circular walk.

It turns out there are several - we pick the intermediate one, which
should take us somewhere in the region of forty minutes. We've gone
all of five before we're _surrounded_ by bird song. Bird song that
falls into the "interesting" bucket: definitely not the usual
suspects. Annoyingly, this coincides with standing on an area of path
that is being swarmed by flies. Perhaps this explains what the first
noise is: a family of Spotted Flycatchers (a later check on
[xeno-canto](https://www.xeno-canto.org) tells us what we were hearing
was the begging call of the juveniles). The parents are flycatching
between three or four of what we guess are their favourite perches.

We perform a strange dance of looking at the birds, sprinting 10m
while flailing our arms at the flies, stopping for another look and
then returning to the first point in the same fashion. This either
goes unnoticed by the flycatchers, or they find it amusing enough to
not be too bothered by it, because this technique yields some lovely
views, and to our later surprise, some not totally awful photos.

As we move onwards, the second unidentifiable noise gets louder, and
then gets resolved - this time we've got a family of Willow
Warblers. They're hopping about in the lower shrubs; making steady
progress - they cross the path and then, without seeming to go too
quickly, are out of sight and earshot in under a minute.

On their own, these encounters would be enough to make this a
worthwhile walk, but we soon realize that these two species are the
two standard birds for this piece of woodland (or, at least, they are
on a summer evening); we see several more groups of both as we go; if
we were counting, we'd have lost count of both species by now.

As the path heads uphill, the wood thins and becomes more heath like;
the path traces the border between the two. A few scattered chats do
their usual perching routine, they are all Stonechat though. On the
wood side, something that is neither flycatcher nor warbler is sitting
on a branch. It looks a bit like a Meadow Pipit. I get excited; a
meadow pipit sitting in a tree is probably a Tree Pipit. After
checking the bird book, the more diagnostic differences (thicker beak,
finer streaking on flanks, etc) are also present.

For a woodland walk to yield such density of birds is quite
unusual. Most woodland birding, in our experience, verges from 'mostly
bird free, with occasional flocks of the usual suspects' to 'dour,
walk through ostensible dark (and possibly dead) forest'. This walk
has been neither of those; what a delight.

Back to the car. Hours of daylight remaining: two. Jeez. How do people
cope with all of this time? We consult with Gordon. Apparently one of
the UK's highest rated woodland walks is a short drive away (Raven's
Rock Gorge), and, as a bonus, it has a giant sculpture of a bear at
the end of it. We might also hear Long-eared Owl there. Worth a go! In
the end, the walk ends up rather shorter than we expected - fifteen
minutes either way - and, wildlife wise, is rather
underwhelming. Perhaps we're just a bit late, or a bit tired, or we
went the wrong way. The drive there was lovely, mind - spectacular
views along the Kyle of Sutherland. Oh, and the bear sculpture
provided some small entertainment. We probably don't wait until late
enough to hear the owl - at some point Emma and I wordlessly agreed it
would be nice to get back to the campsite soon, i.e before it gets dark.

We get back to the campsite for just before 10pm. There's still plenty
of light. There are also plenty of midges. The 'Pondside' should
probably have warned us of that. I can hear a Grasshopper Warbler
reeling somewhere in the field on the other side of the pond. Time for
one last tick? It's worth a go.

Finding this little brown job turns out to be much harder than I'd
hoped. The open landscape makes the sound not that useful in getting a
fix on the bird. We do a lot of wandering around with our hands cupped
behind our ears; all this does is convince us the bird is further away
than we thought. 

As this field rolls away from the campsite, it gets progressively
damper, ending up in a tiny burn. As it dampens, the foliage gets
deeper - a mixture of longer grasses and small shrubs. If the bird is
below the grass layer this is hopeless; so we just need to scan the
things sticking up from it. A first look at these yields no
fruit. Emma decides that the midges/bird ratio has dropped below
critical and heads back to the tent ("I have faith in you" she says,
cryptically, on her way off). I hang about a bit. The reeling stops. I
start to follow Emma's footsteps, and after a few seconds it
restarts. Oh, we're playing that game are we? Well then.

I decide the bird is, once again, further away than originally
thought. I move further along the field, where an area of the drier
grassland juts out into the denser stuff. The reeling continues,
seemingly still right in front of me. Another scan of the bushes and
shrubs yields nothing. The reeling stops. I start heading back to the
tent again, to see if that has the same effect. The reeling begins
again. Back we go. 

This time I try varying where I stand between multiple scans of the
various plants sticking out of the long grass. There's the little
brown beast; barely a couple of inches above the vegetation line, on a
tiny offshoot of what looks like a thistly tree (botany isn't my
strong point, sorry). It's still reeling; it's mouth wide open the
whole time; the sound giving the impression that the whole bird is
vibrating. Perhaps it is; the percussive nature of sound and Newton's
3rd Law suggests it might be.

I return triumphantly to the tent and collapse into one of the best
sleeps I've had for ages.

The next day has some excellent locations, but only one tick. We
encounter Stonechat (no Whinchat, mind) and Redpoll (a little flock
flitting between three areas of silver birch) on a very pleasant walk
from the Ferrycroft Visitor Centre. We enjoy excellent views of
Redshank and Ringed Plover (as well as the mountains behind Loch Shin)
from the famed Dalchork Bird Hide. A picnic alongside Loch Loyal is
rather briefly held - rain briefly attempts to intrude; we retreat to
eating in the car.

Our planned campsite at Tongue is being renovated. We don't much fancy
pitching in the tiny area leftover from the building site, so we
decide to fast forward to our next location in Durness. From the
second carpark on the crossing of the Kyle of Tongue we do pick up a
distant Black-throated Diver, though; an excellent tick to find so
early on - despite the fact they breed in basically all of the bit of
Scotland we plan to visit, they are not the easiest birds to see.

A brief trip down a very tiny road takes us to the path up Ben Hope -
we decide against a hike up - there isn't time, and the weather looks
a bit shifty. We do, however, see a very bold Common Sandpiper down in
the valley below. The drive from there to Durness is highly scenic,
helped by some fairly apocalyptic light - thick cloud occasionally
being penetrated with summer sunshine, but barring the constant Pied
Wagtails and a few auks on the various sea inlets (We spend a few
stops looking for other divers, or a better view of Black-throated),
we don't see much in the way of birds.

We find a place to pitch, strategically placing our car to act as a
windbreak - the weather is still sub-par, the wind has a bit of bite,
and we don't remember if our tent is a budget special or something
more substantial. We take residence in the campsite's pub to plan the
next day's activities and get our first reminder that there's some
sort of world-footballing event happening. After a first beer in
something like five months, we decide to add our weight to the ballast
keeping the tent in place and get an early night; the clouds have
brought the day to an end a bit earlier than usual.

We wake to the smell of bacon sandwiches; there's a food-wagon on-site
and it makes breakfast from 7:30. The sun is out, and the breeze has
lightened; good, we've got a packed itinerary to get through.

I go for a quick stare at the sea with the scope. On the way, I am
greeted with the question "so you like wildlife then?". Uh-oh. Am I
breaking some sort of telescope rule? I opt for embarrassed honesty:
"yes, wildlife, that's me". "Well, if you walk about 20m that way,
there's a family of weasels playing in that gully". Amazing. There are
indeed some mustelids jumping about in a gully (the gully's full of
twisty grasses and shrubs, so the view is of an occasional brown shape
shooting in and out of the top of it). If pushed, I might say these were 
stoats rather than weasels (darker brown coat). Joyous little things in 
any case.

The view over the sea is phenomenal - this area of the UK is famous
for its pristine beaches, and Sango Sands is definitely one of
them. Bird wise, I am struggling - the sun is still quite low over the
sea, so I'm staring at a bunch of silhouettes. I can tell two of them
are divers, but my loon-fu isn't sufficiently elite to discern which
sort.

Back to the tent for a well behaved breakfast of yoghurt and granola
(we both want a bacon sandwich, but having brought food with us, to
let it go off would be unacceptable). A short drive to Balnakeil beach
followed by a short walk around the promontory between there and
Durness is the first item on the agenda.

Gordon tells us that the area around a lake roughly half way through
this walk is a possible Corncrake site. That may well be true, but our
chance of seeing one at this time of day is zero in any case. Instead,
we enjoy the views of Fulmar from the cliffs, pick up the trip's (and
the year's) first Ravens, and enjoy the company of several fine
Wheatear. In the reedbed North of the lake, we also pick up a Sedge
Warbler; notable only for how far North we are - Gordon lists a site
considerably more Southern than here as his most Northerly, so we're
mildly triumphant that we've exceeded that.

We turn our walk into a circuit by walking back down the road to the
beach. Emma hives off into the craft village while I collect the car -
an ideal separation of responsibilities.

Our next stop is Cape Wrath. A very metal sounding place. We park up
(badly) near the shore of the Kyle of Durness and await the ferry. The
weather, at this point, has transformed into "full on awesome". The
visibility over the mountains to the South and South East is
jawdroppingly beautiful; we think we can see Ben Hope's peak and
wonder whether climbing it today might have been a good plan.

The ferry trip is short, over some of the clearest water I've seen in
the UK. On the other side, two minibuses await to take us along the
road to the lighthouse at the end of the Cape. We barrel in to the
front seats of one of these as fast as we can; sticking me in the back
of a minibus over forty minutes of rough track is a sure-fire recipe for vomit.

The minibus driver is also our tour guide. He's a veritable mine of
information about the goings on of the Cape (it's mostly used as a
military range, but its remoteness also makes it a haven for nature),
and has a keen sense of humour. Our choice to sit in the front means
we can hear everything he says: bonus. We can also hear grousing in
the back about being unable to hear anything. Schadenfreude
bonus. Another front seat perk: we see Arctic Skuas before anyone else
- a group of four circling above the track. Life tick bonus. Get in.

We stop around two thirds of the way along in the hope of a better
Skua view: a couple of pairs nest of some mounds right next to the
track. They are absent at time of passing; we'll have another look on
the way back.

Eventually the tour guide runs out of facts and starts to ask us about
us. It turns out that he used to live about ten minutes away from
where I grew up, and, hilariously, his son went to the same school as
me (and, after a bit of thinking later, was even in my year
group). We're still getting over precisely how bonkers this is when we
pull into the car park at the lighthouse.

I could stay in places like this lighthouse for a very long
time. There's something about the combination of green grass, cliffs
and the sea bashing into them that really grips me. I can see
why the lighthouse café operator has been out here for so long.

The grounds of the lighthouse and its outbuildings are perfect
Wheatear territory, and true to form, there are two or three of them
commuting between their favourite perch points. The cliffs and sea
surrounding the point are dotted with auks, including Puffins. What a
tremendous place. A shame we have only an hour here - it zips passed
in what feels like ten minutes.

Back to the minibus. On the way back, the Skuas are on show; handily,
there's one light and dark morph, so I can get out my one Arctic Skua
fact.

Barring a few Stonechat, a highly idiotic sheep and some seals
lounging on a newly exposed sandbank in the Kyle, the journey back is
otherwise uneventful. Something about the temperature and the
roughness of the road takes me back to our tour of the Pantanal of
around a year ago, and I am awash with sleepy nostalgia.

The ferry back across the Kyle provides yet more opportunity for
gawping at the scenery. What a pleasant trip.

We've one place left to visit today - the beaches of Oldshoremore. This
is ostensibly a scenery jaunt, but Gordon tells us the crofts around
the beaches are a potential place to find Twite.

The drive there is full of more amazing geology - you can see why the
whole North Coast 500 has been a marketable ploy. Eventually we arrive
at a tiny bay (mildly stressed by tiny roads and local drivers). We're
one bay further round than we ought to be, but it looks like a nice
walk, so this will do.

The nice walk turns into a bit more of a scramble than
intended. Borderline coasteering. It does inadvertently deliver some
lovely views of Red-throated Diver and Black Guillemot, which briefly
appeases Emma, who is unhappy at the quality of navigation on
offer. No sign of any Twite though. We eventually make it round to the
intended beach; again, stunningly beautiful; we worry we're going to
get inoculated to this level of scenery if it keeps going. The return
journey to the car is less eventful: we manage to cut across between
the bays rather than walking the coastline this time, so it takes five
minutes rather than half an hour. We negotiate the tiny roads back to,
well, slightly closer to civilisation and eventually end up on a
campsite in Scourie, where Emma persuades the attached bar to give us
enough boiling water for a Pot Noodle each. What a day.

The next day's itinerary is less busy: the only item on the agenda is
Handa. As a result, the start of the day is a bit more relaxed;
there's plenty of time to gawp at the pair of Red-throated Divers
looking for their breakfast in the bay.

We make it to Tarbet in reasonable time; we won't be on the first
ferry of the day, but the second looks hopeful. As we wait, a Great
Skua floats over. That's a bit of an anticlimax; the whole Handa trip
is to see Great Skua. Still, a tick.

The ferry arrives, and we undergo the usual land/sea transition of
"it's nice and warm today" to "you know what, with the spray and the
wind I'm glad I brought my jacket". We arrive at Handa on another
ridiculously good looking beach. This does manage to fill our shoes
with sand on our way to the information hut, unfortunately.

After a brief use of the facilities and some stashing of unnecessary
layers in the hut, we head off on the path towards the centre of the
island.

The path is _deadly_ for birders. To stop it interfering too much in
the drainage of the island, frequent canals a good foot across have
been cut into it. I spend the first ten minutes narrowly avoiding
them; finally, with a fit of swearing, a misstep drops me in
one. Walking and looking are going to have to be disparate activities
for a time!

It's not too long before we're alongside an area that's pockmarked
with nesting Skuas. They're highly territorial, but unlike the terns
on the Farnes, have managed to work out that nesting right next to the
path and that territoriality is incompatible.

The views are still very good. We're both struck by the oddness of
going from "never seen this bird before" to "everything I can see is
this bird". This includes the birds soaring in the air above us,
too. Mad.

We just about manage to tear ourselves away from this area and further
up the hill to the West. A cheerful pair of Stonechat accompany us,
and another pair of skuas peer down from a rock at the top. Once we're
at the top we're probably five or ten minutes from the first
cliffs. More skuas. This time having a bit of a barney while floating
about on a lake. For variety, one or two Red-throated Divers perform a
flyover.

We reach the clifftop. Time for a sit down and a snack. Below us,
thousands upon thousands of birds do the same. The smell and the noise
is overwhelming. More time is spent taking terrible photos of Fulmar
fly-bys.

The scale of the cliff colonies here is hard to describe. We walk
around the West side of the island and it's non-stop; the cliffs look
like dystopian cityscapes, but here, the residents are birds and the
lighting mostly guano. This is BBC nature documentary wildlife quality.

Our state of whelmedness is probably not being helped by the
continuing unScottish sunshine; it's not a flat walk, and we've been
on the go for a couple of hours already. The second half of the walk
feels (and is) quicker, to our relief. There's much less to look at -
a pod of dolphins offshore is the only event of note. Searches along
the coastline for White-tailed Eagle is made rather tricky by the
extensive heat haze. We feel like we've seen what we've come here to
see, and want to get on.

This isn't helped by us missing a boat back to the shore by about two
minutes. Oh well. A brief paddle in the sea from the "no-one will ever 
believe this is in Scotland" beach won't do us any harm, I suppose.

The boat back cools us down nicely, and we settle down on a picnic
bench above the harbour to have lunch proper. The crofts around the
picnic area once again fail to contain any Twite, however; we're
starting to wonder if they exist at all.

The remainder of the day is tickless, but still worthy of comment. Two
further Red-throated Divers and a stupendous view are obtained in
Kylesku. A pleasant walk in the sun ("I am too hot now; why did you
let me wear this outfit?" - Emma) occurs on one of the nature reserves
in Little Assynt. Lochinver is roundly ignored (it's neither lunch nor
dinnertime) and a herd of cows are the only real impediment to our
progress via "the wee mad road".

We exit said road onto the Coigach peninsula and head West. A
Short-eared owl buzzes us as we drive along Loch Osgaig. We just about
keep the car on the road surface. A passing caravan driver glares at
us from the other side of the road. Ahem.

A little further along, Gordon advises us to scan a pair of Lochs for
Black-throated Diver. The nearest one, Loch Ra, delivers. This time
the light is behind us, and the plumage is properly on show. What a
smart looking bird! One of the main reasons for a Summer trip was to
catch the bird in its breeding plumage; this quality of view
vindicates that part of the plan, at least. Further admiring oohs and
aahs occur once we have the 'scope set up.

A short drive round to Altandhu, an abortive attempt at seawatching
(be warned, Reiff is rife with people who are hostile to anyone not
from Reiff ever managing to park there) and a remarkable penalty shoot
out victory are all that remain in the day.

We're up early the next day, and are disappointed by the lack of loons
in close proximity to the campsite; perhaps that isn't always a
feature. A quick blitz up Stac Pollaidh yields no Ptarmigan, and
staring at the mountains in the distance yields no eagles. Gordon's
advice for the rest of the day is as follows: stop in Ullapool to pick
up Twite, stop in a few places along the coast to look for
White-tailed Eagle. 

Ullapool is delightful but Twite-free.

Our coastal views are blighted by cleggs; several sea eagles could fly
by in the time we're spending flailing at them; our walk from
Badrallach is particularly disrupted, although a young Cuckoo does
briefly pop up below where we're walking. 

We become elite scanners of remote hillsides, but it earns us only
crows. Gruinard Island is keenly scanned for sea eagles pretending to
be rocks. None are found. A flock of Siskin feeding in a meadow behind
tonight's campsite are also not Twite.

The campsite is immediately in our bad books for designating tents an
area with no sea view; all the views are given over to static caravans
and parking for fully motorised campers. Humph. We hoof some dinner
down and speed off to Mellon Udrigle; it looks like there should be a
decent circular walk from there, and there's a tiny, tiny possibility
we might spot a Petrel or two (Gordon tells us they're active on
Priest Island).

Thankfully, the beach at MU is straight out of the tourist guide, and
the light when we reach it is pretty impressive too. There's a
campsite next to it: why didn't we stay here? A pair of Ringed Plovers
do an excellent 'broken-wing' performance for us; we back off to see
if we can spot the chicks, and find two. Super cute.

We set out towards the bit of the land that juts closest to the Summer
Isles, and when we get there, set up in the sheltered lea of the hill
for a bit of staring at the sea. Amusingly, at this point, we're only
around 15km away from where we started this morning; we've probably
driven more like 150km.

Not much success is had, and any ideas of staying until darkness are
(rightly) pooh-poohed. An attempt will instead be made at a circular
looking walk. After a couple of false starts (we weren't quite as far
West as we thought) this goes rather nicely. As the last light of the
day is just leaving, we happen upon a chubby beaked passerine clinging
to a rocky outcrop. Now, _that_ could be Twite. With a bit more
light, it could _obviously_ be Twite, but we're now far enough South
that five past ten in the evening is twilight rather than daylight. We
take a lot of terrible photos, but having spent much of the day
familiarising ourselves with the bird book, we're pretty sure we've
got our bird. After a reexamination back at the car, the only
diagnostic we're short of is an obviously yellow beak, and some
pictures on the internet convince us that isn't always
forthcoming. The thing that really sells us is the jizz; the low to
the ground pose depicted in the book is _identical_ to how it's
sitting in our images. A late tick; not as late as Pondside's Gropper,
mind!

We roar back into the campsite at 10:30pm, widely disregarding the
10pm curfew and the plea for quiet. Bad luck static/motorised
caravanners, you'll just have to salve your ears with the beautiful
view in the morning.

The next day begins with a trip to Inverewe Gardens. Now. Strictly, no
ticks occurred here, although we did come across a very friendly Song
Thrush and a family of Treecreepers. That said, this was still a real
eye-opening place; the range (and vivacity) of what's grown here is
borderline unbelievable, given the latitude, and the clever tricks the
original designers pulled to make it all work are equally
captivating. If you're in the area, go.

We leave Inverewe rather later than we'd expected. Having planned to
take in lunch in a pub for a change (there's only so much Spanish
Omelette one can eat in a week), we know we've got around ninety
minutes to get from Inverewe round to the Badachro Inn. That gives us
around an hour of leeway for exploring. Gordon instructs us that the
road following the Western shore of Loch Ewe isn't a bad bet for
White-tailed Eagle, and that's basically right next to Inverewe
itself, so we give it a go.

The first part of this drive North is alongside the parts of Loch Ewe
we've already given a lot of scanning time too from the gardens. As
such, we don't pay an enormous amount of attention. The Loch widens
out as we get past the Isle of Ewe, and the view from the road does
too. We agree that this area needs focus, and that Emma should be
chief Eagle focusser, given the necessity of keeping the car on the
road falls to yours truly.

Barely five seconds later, Emma pipes up. "What's that?" A quick
glance away from the road yields a couple of gulls are meandering
around on the right; but before I can raise an eyebrow to open a round
of the "you're making it up" game, a larger shape a bit higher up hoves into
view. I bring the car to a halt in what must be the world's best
placed passing place and have a proper look. Yeah, that thing is
_bloody enormous_; all the talk of flying barn doors that I've heard
now makes a bit more sense. The car is swiftly exited to obtain a
better view; binoculars only though - this eagle isn't hanging
about. It quickly gains several hundred metres worth of altitude and
then effortlessly floats off to the North-West. From barn door to
barely visible in a couple of minutes; I can see how other folks have
been unlucky enough to not cross paths with these birds.

A very pleasant lunch in Badachro follows, most notable for the
reverse in our usual fortunes. For once, we are the organised people
arriving during the half hour of food being served. An angry couple
turning up just as we're served ("how come they're getting food
then?") provide us with some additional schadenfreude. We do consider
taking their dog into care though - it spends the first fifteen
minutes straining towards a nearby water bowl before they realise
what's going on.

The food gives us enough time to think about plans. The West Coast, at
this point, probably isn't going to offer many more opportunities for
the year list. There will likely be some epic scenery on offer
(Torridon/Applecross is supposed to be spectacular, and Skye is
supposed to be pretty special too), but the only thing we might pick
up there that we haven't already is Golden Eagle, by our
interpretation of Gordon and some close examination of BirdTrack
records. Alternatively, we could head back East and have a crack at a
more varied set of environments - the Glens, Loch Ruthven, Findhorn
Valley, Cairngorms, etc.

We decide East, and set out that way as soon as lunch has had time to
settle. A first stop on the edge of Loch Maree provides a decently
effortful walk up to the tops. There are no Ptarmigan there, but the
views are something else. It's also _deserted_; we see perhaps two
other groups of people across four hours of walking. At this point, I
am glad the readership of this journal will be limited; I'm not sure I
want to share this hill with anyone else when we go back. A mildly
perilous descent keeps us entertained on the way back to the car.

A long (but enjoyable) drive gets us to Beauly, and our least friendly
campsite of the journey so far. Hmm. Well, at least it positions us
nicely for the first part of the next day, i.e.

GLENS! Yes, glens! Specifically, Glen Strathfarrar, which Gordon
reckons is the underrated one. It has the added bonus of having a
token based entry system, operated by a delightful (read: on the
surface, polite, but boiling over with anger at being required to
perform the duty assigned to her) lady with a gate. We take token
three, and head up into the valley, hopeful of finding Whinchat, Wood
Warbler and possibly even a Crossbill.

We get a _lot_ of Stonechat, doing their usual confiding perching on
wires, tall bits of foliage, bushes, etc. We struggle a bit to know
what to do; should we be birding from the car? Or making jaunts from
the car up into the wooded areas around the sides? In the end we end
up making lots of short stops, some with a bit of exploration
attached. Plenty of interesting littlies distract us during these
jaunts; we use our previous encounters across the two weeks to quickly
identify the majority of them as Siskin; the others are the usual
suspects.

More driving. Now, _that_ was a Whinchat, wasn't it? Bigger, hint of a
supercilium, although a bit worn. It's off to the right of the
track. We bring the car to a halt to have a better look - lots of the
Stonechats were in family groups; is our Whinchat going to lead us to
the rest of the family? It hops about between a few tall stalks; we
quickly work out that it wants us no closer than 20m; surprisingly
cautious for a chat. This is far enough (and the foliage thick enough)
that it takes us a while to work out we're actually watching at least
a pair of birds; and a little longer to pick out a juvenile. And even
longer discussing whether there's a second. It really isn't
particularly clear, even with the scope. Not the greatest Whinchat
we've ever seen, but we'll take it.

Post Whinchat, we continue onwards. I've been promised hydroelectric
artifacts at the end of the public part of the drive. Our only company
is a pair of cyclists (who we trade places with repeatedly as we stop
and start to look at things) and a small army of vehicles from the
electricity company. One wonders how many people are really required
to be on site at this dam, and whether working in such a terrific
location is a cushy option jealously guarded by those who have it. We
don't see much, wildlife wise; a Buzzard and a couple of giant
butterflies. The faster flowing areas of the stream at the base of the
Glen refuses to give up a Dipper.

We reach the dam, and I park up. Emma falls asleep (it's very warm,
and the gentle drive has proven soporific). I launch off on a walk
around the dam (lots of water jetting around at high pressure, Bond
villain capable outbuildings; this is no time for sleeping!). It isn't
clear whether public access is allowed beyond it, so I decide to do an
experiment: if I walk up the road on the South side of the dam, will
anyone shout at me?

Not immediately, it seems. Although amusingly, having set off and
discovered the walk is not explicitly disallowed, I feel demotivated
to continue much further - I'm not going to manage the circuit of the
loch above the dam in the time we've got allotted here, so any step I
take forward I'm going to have to retrace soon afterwards.

Instead, I set up camp on an exposed corner to give the loch and
surroundings a good glaring at. Nothing of note. I wonder if "too hot
for raptors" is a thing; the horizons have been barren!

Back to the car. Emma is awake, and is not enjoying the precarious
slope on which I parked. Oops. A bit of manoeuvring sets us up with a
view of the dam's outflow, which makes the area cool enough for a spot
of lunch.

Lunch brings a decision: one glen is enough. We don't know what we're
doing, and we suspect the right thing to do is drive in early, go for
a hike for several hours from a well chosen point, and then head out
again, a level of investment we're not ready for.

We return the token to the polite (but still awkward) lady at the
gate, pause for a refreshing beverage and a wee in Cannich, elect not
to revisit Corrimony RSPB (*great* cairn, but desperately needs a
circular walk) and soon we're on the A82 back to Inverness.

Next stop: Loch Ruthven, for what should be a nailed on Slavonian
Grebe. And, indeed, it is, albeit a rather more distant view than we
had hoped for. And the plumage is a bit faded, as we're towards the
tail end of breeding season. Still, life tick, mustn't complain! The
Loch doesn't provide a great deal more of interest (barring a nice
Red-breasted Merganser family, approximately forty thousand Coot, and
some sunbathers who are rather surprised to find themselves sharing a
space with birders), so we make ourselves scarce.

Birders who know this area can probably have a reasonable guess at our
next destination. The Monadliath mountains are to our East, and the
small town of Farr (possibly a hamlet?) is only 5km away.

Yeah, it's Findhorn Valley (or Strathdearn, to give it its technically
accurate name) time. Not before we traverse the road to it from Farr,
though. Gordon has built up the terror of this route
substantially. Can't be any worse than the wee mad road though, right?
All seems well until we spy a giant caterpillar truck heading towards
us. Uh. Even in a passing place there's not going to be enough room
for that thing to go past us. Surely the driver knows that? Why have
they come this way? We plough on, confused, and mildly
terrified. There is hope though - perhaps the truck is on some access
route to the power line maintenance that seems to be happening off to
the North of the road. A few more nervous seconds and we're confident
that unless the truck decides to ram a couple of walls between it and
us, we should be alright.

We enter the valley triumphantly. We ignore advice to stop and look
for littlies - our Glen experience has taught us that we're just not
patient enough. We drive as far as a public vehicle is allowed to and
then park up. I suppress the desire to fill a backpack with snacks and
head off up the valley on foot for a serious explore; what's at the
end of this track?

We have the place to ourselves. That probably isn't a great omen, is
it? Still, this is better than our last visit - a cold, grey February
day with intermittent rain versus a warm Summer day with wonderful
early evening light. The horizon is scanned, no, _scoured_ for
raptors. There are, at least, several Buzzards in the distance. These
are checked for signs of being more interesting, but Buzzards is what
they are.

There's a squeak from the top of the hill immediately in front of us
(another win for Gordon - that's where he says you should look). I
swing the scope round and find...nothing. The binoculars pick up a
couple of sharp-winged raptors swooping around. These are Peregrine
Falcons. We should probably have worked that out from the noise - its
the same as what we heard near Ben Hope. They continue to mill around
near the top of that hill before skidding off to the left into
nothingness.

We take turns keeping an eye on that same hill. Result: more
Buzzards. One is briefly mobbed by a Kestrel (definitely a Kestrel,
not a Merlin, sadly) which provides some brief entertainment. I find,
strangely, that I don't mind the lack of new-for-the-year raptors.

We eventually start to get hungry. That seems as good a trigger as any
to depart and attempt to find shelter for the evening.  This proves
rather more difficult than it has done elsewhere - it's Friday night,
and, apparently, this area is popular as a weekend getaway. We
eventually concede defeat and head for a hotel in
Grantown-on-Spey. This turns out to be a total victory; it has a
kettle (pot noodle #2 of the trip) and does an excellent
breakfast. Hard to argue with for the price we paid!

It's a gentle start the next day - we eventually rock up at Loch
Garten RSPB for around 10am. We're on a mission to find Crested
Tit. This is _the_ place to see them. We would also accept Crossbills
in their place, or potentially Common Redstart.

We take Gordon's claims on the frequency of sightings (claims of car
park ticks for both species) with a pinch of salt; this is going to be
woodland birding - a lot of sound, a lot of flitting, not a lot of
time to get a good look and a positive id.

We start with a trip up to the hide where the reserve's more famous
residents are usually on view. Hilariously though, the usual Ospreys
have made an absolute hash of breeding and have buggered off in a
huff. We gain some very limited intel on our targets and lower our
expectations.

We return to the car park to set out on the woodland walk. Usual
suspects abound: Coal, Blue, Great and Long-tailed Tit, Goldcrest,
Treecreeper, Siskin (this is, we have determined, a usual suspect up
here). We talk to two other roaming bands of birders who haven't had
much joy. Our only hope is that they've been negligent - there's some
evidence of this, as their lists lack the final three of what we've
started to consider as par for the course.

We're also starting to be able to discern by sound whether something
is of interest or not; we start to tune out the Siskins and the more
standard Tit calls. We're almost at the zenith of the circuit when
both Ems and I are stopped in our tracks by a flock of three or four
birds all emitting a call that is novel.

...and, once we get our bins on them, they look novel too. Those
little quiffs are unmistakably the hallmark of Crested Tits. Without
the sound and a good view through the bins, they could well have
skipped by unnoticed, perhaps written off as Blue Tits; we feel pretty
smug to have discovered them, a feeling that amplifies as we see no
others on the remainder of the walk, and no other birders who have
encountered them! The way back also has some excitement - a giant
anthill, a possible Redstart (that escapes before we can convince
ourselves) and a collection of Siskins hanging about in the canopy in
an unsuccessful attempt to making us think they're Crossbills. They
succeed only in giving me a sore neck from all the up-gazing.

We return to the car exuberant in our hard earned woodland birding
tick. And also hungry, and a bit hot; the fine weather is persisting
and the temperature, remarkably, is heading into the high twenties.

We attempt an off piste stop on the advice of Gordon and one of the
RSPB wardens, at Tulloch Moor. This mostly just leads to aggravation -
we don't really know where we're going, and it's borderline too hot to
move around in direct sunlight. A switch to flipflops helps a bit to
start with, and then proves to be instantaneously idiotic as soon as
we enter the moorland, as my feet are scratched by several species of
heather, gorse, and god knows what else. We (well, me) quickly tire of
this plan and retreat to the car to shed a layer of clothing and apply
snacks.

We think we've had enough of this area (compared to the rest of our
trip, its altogether far too full of people), and decide an expedition
considerably further South might be in order. We set out for the other
side of the Cairngorm range, which, as the crow flies, might be twenty
miles, but in a car is more like fifty.

Our original aim was to have another crack at Ptarmigan by taking the
chairlift at Glenshee ski centre, but we miss the last one by a matter
of minutes; after a few unproductive minutes of horizon staring, we
decide to return the next day. Instead, we redirect to the Linn of Dee
for a highly pleasant evening walk in the woods. It isn't particularly
productive, but the light is fabulous, and the drive back delivers
some very well lit Buzzards, and delightfully, a bonus Osprey.

We retire to a B&B in Kirkmichael (some room confusion, a _very_ noisy
party, not our favourite overnight stay) and try to avoid thinking
about going home the next day.

The next day's progress is briefly postponed by a forgotten
jumper. Once retrieved, we speed back to the chairlift for one final
"there's no such thing as a bloody Rock Ptarmigan, is there?"
session. This one, at least, requires little physical effort, thanks
to the chair lift. The operators make positive noises ("oh yes,
there've been two or three around recently") that unfortunately come
to naught - all we see is a family of Red Grouse on the way up.

We've got time for one last stop, and we choose to take it at Glen
Tanar. There's an off chance of picking up Crossbill or perhaps
Redstart here. I'm not that hopeful for Crossbill (despite Gordon's
"possible from the car park" exhortations), but a brief read of the
Birdtrack map suggests Redstart could happen.

The car park could well work for Crossbills - if we had a bit more
time we'd give the woodland paths some serious attention. We drop into
the visitor centre to see if there is someone clueful inside. It is,
unfortunately, deserted; we're on our own. A mixture of time and
laziness pushes us to take path three up to the Knockie viewpoint.

After a brief unwalkable section of gravel, we're suddenly in a
different type of area - the trees are mostly deciduous (providing
some occasional much-looked for shade - it's still unbelievably
sunny), there's forest nearby, but we're very much at the edge of it,
and there's some open grassland nearby. The words "this has got
Redstart written all over it" manage to escape my mouth before I have
the sense to stop them. That's probably torn it. Wait, no it hasn't,
there's one sitting on that fencepost. Unmistakable. Bloody hell. It
bobs about a bit, before deciding we've got too close and darting off
into some nearby trees. We disturb it again a little further along and
it returns to its original post, taunting us, staying far enough away
to prevent us from taking terrible photos of it.

I spend most of the rest of the walk in a state of disbelief that it's
possible to say something so hilariously definite and have it not blow
up in your face. Before we know it, we're back in the car and its time
to head back home, via Inverness and Luton.

A bumper haul of *eighteen* ticks from the trip brings us to
188. Even with my pessimism, 200 is starting to transition from
'possible' to 'likely'.

That's no reason to take the foot off the gas though. The next
weekend, Emma disappears off to Essex to see family. A back-to-back
birding opportunity opens up to me - the annual Bonaparte's Gull has
returned to Oare Marshes, bringing with it levels of attention that
have brought the reports of several other rarities. In addition, mail
arrives from Nigel Dodd - there's a trip to Thursley Common with the
West London Bird Club happening, and due to its particular focus, it
only starts mid-afternoon - I only need to be in Ealing for 2pm or so.

As such, I make a reasonable go of an early start - I'm out of the
house before seven, equipped with scope and a surplus of sandwiches,
and I'm chatting with the medium-early bird crowd at Oare just before
9am (the _early_ crowd, in July, have already made their first circuit
and started on their second). It's a mixed start - I've _just_ missed
a White-rumped Sandpiper, but on a tiny mudflat in the centre of the
East Flood, I've found one (well, a pair, to be precise) of Oare's
signature birds, Curlew Sandpiper.

News from the other birders - Napoleon is in town, and has been seen,
as ever, migrating between the mud bordering the Swale and the East
Flood. I'm a past master of finding old boney, so I don't worry overly
about finding him immediately. The report I'm really keen to catch up
with is Black-winged Stilt - a family of them have been frequenting
the reserve all week. The intel from the group I ask is that they are
also around, but not visible from right here - try from the South
side, or the sea wall. I set off with a couple of other interested
parties in search of them.

We give the South hide a try - it's usually a bit of a write off,
viewing only a tiny fragment of the East Flood that isn't visible from
the sea wall or the road. For once, however, it delivers - two of the
Stilts are messing about in one of those areas. Their presence gives
the already hot morning an extra hint of Mediterranean charm. The
temporarily gathered Stilt team sit and we enjoy their antics, before
they float off, legs flimsily dangling, back to a place more easily
viewed from elsewhere.

Onwards in search of White-rumped Sandpiper, then! Surely it must be
visible from the sea wall, if it is here at all? "You'll be lucky",
three gentlemen already scanning from there tell us. "The last we
heard, it disappeared off down the Swale with the Godwits when the
tide changed". Mixed feelings - I could, I suppose, have got here even
earlier, but at what cost to my ability to keep my eyes open? I wonder
at what stage of the aging process getting up obscenely early starts
to be natural again and have further mixed feelings about not having
yet reached it.

Well, sans WRS, I suppose we can at least give the rest of the flood a
good look. We find the Stilts again, this time, the whole family. We
guide a newcomer on to the Curlew Sandpipers, which, although further
away from here, are more easily spotted, as the sun is behind us. A
couple of flocks of Black-tailed Godwit fly in and cause a bit of a
stir; some Bearded Reedlings ping at us from the nearby reedbed. It
would be very easy to set up camp here and while away most of the day
- with some effort I remind myself that this birding double-header
requires me to spend no more than three hours here, and I'm coming up
to half that time already. Time to find Napoleon.

A brief moment is spent at the corner hide checking the flats for the
sandpiper, or, perhaps, a Spotted Redshank, but this is a fool's
errand, and I quickly abandon it. I continue to walk back along the
sea wall, sternly asking every Black-headed Gull I see "etes-vous Bonaparte?".
 
Amusingly, Bonaparte's head is more black than Black-headed Gull (whose head 
is more of a chocolate colour), and, in this light, that will be considerably
obvious, and, funnily enough, there it is, around five metres from the shore
of the Swale. I help a few other folk onto it who are struggling a bit (I'm
fortunate enough to have seen it on a previous Summer visit, so I know 
what I'm looking for, for once) and then go for a brief wander beyond the
road on the Saxon Shore Way to collect my thoughts. 

A difficult week, the effects of which are mostly already erased by
this bit of birding. A little more walking pushes some more of it
away. Now, to head back to see if any more news has been dug up by the
growing group of birders collecting on the road.

Still nothing more of the White-rumped Sandpiper - that's going to
have to go down as a dip. Also, several folks here haven't found the
Curlew Sandpipers yet, so some time is spent remedying that. The group
swells further, this time with some professionals; my status rapidly
dwindles from "Curlew Sandpiper and Bonaparte's Gull specialist" to
anonymous nobody as they spot the return of the Black-winged Stilts. And then,
just as I'm having a look at them again, I miss Water Rail off to the
right somewhere. A very helpful birder does his very best to direct
me, but the little sod (the rail, not the birder) has already disappeared into 
the reeds. How daft would it be to reach the end of the year without seeing one?

The crowd thins a bit as a bundle troop off to the Swale to find
Napoleon. Just as I'm about to try exploring the typically
unproductive West side of the reserve, someone pipes up "think I've
found a Spotshank", and, you know what, they have. It's near enough to
the road that all the diagnostic material is obvious; it's even
standing next to a standard Redshank for contrast. Oddly, it's the
greyness of the bird that picks it out first - the size difference and
the slight droop in the beak come second. Still, very smart bird, and
a fourth tick before the sun's over the yard arm; take that, Scotland!

Time's up - time to head back to Faversham and start making my way
towards Ealing, where a lift to Thursley Common awaits me. I'm nervous
about this - I'm borderline allergic to organised outings of more than
one person, and this outing has been _very_ well organised for, I'm
guessing, around ten folks. I'm greeted by Andrew Peel, who, free of
his RSPB officiating, turns out to have a devilish sense of
humour. Similarly, Nigel's enthusiasm, when he arrives, is contagious,
and there's little to no sign of any faffing about. Perhaps organised
birders are an exception to the rule.

The journey to Thursley takes longer than I expected - there's
something about getting out of London to the South-West that manages
to suck in time. Perhaps it has a swampy metric. The section around
the M25 has a nice surprise for us - just after Heathrow there are
thirty odd Red Kites floating around.

Eventually we pull up in the car park, where the group swells
further. Lots of introductions. I am reminded of some standup where
the comedian successfully represents the reality of this situation,
with the names entering into one ear, and then immediately falling on
the floor, with a clang. Oh well. There's an understandable bit of
waiting around while we see if anyone else is going to turn up, but
it's mercifully short, and soon we're off.

We head out into (onto?) the common, taking a South-West sort of path,
marked by waypoints with a mosquito design on them. A memory of when I
was last here is keyed on this - I can see an impressive
mosquito sculpture in my mind's eye. I don't think that's too for
away. 

We make reasonable progress for a group of this size, causing
only minor grief to those trying to go in the opposite direction on
the same paths. No-one falls off the boardwalk, despite the level of
focus being applied to any avian movement; this group is seriously
keen.

Before long, we're in a heathy bit of the common rather than a boggy
bit, and immediately every other bird is a Stonechat. We check them
diligently in case of Whinchat, but after the first three or four, I
start to save my energy - anything of that shape that's so confiding
is already on the list.

I've neglected to mention one further bit of news - there's been a
Red-backed Shrike here for at least a week. This particular route is
supposed to take us straight past it. Much examination of possible
perch points is done without any success.

We encounter a pair or bescoped birders heading the other way. They
are _very_ cheerful. Is it because they've just seen it? Yes. Just
around the corner, apparently. The group marches on with a bit more of
a spring in their step. I've gently manoeuvred myself to the front (no
shoving required) in case the sight of such a big group spooks it.

The path curves clockwise around the base of a mound. Off to the right
are disparate clumps of scrubby trees and bushes, which are
occasionally close enough to the path to obscure the view out. Each
time the view is clear we take a moment to scan. On the third time of
asking, we find the Shrike sitting in a tree not ten metres from the
path. As predicted though, the wave of excitement this washes through
the group spooks it, and it bails diametrically away from us.

Those of us at the front with an unobscured view keep our eyes on it
for long enough to see it land; only another twenty or thirty metres
off, but in a tricky to describe bush that, from some angles is
invisible from the path. Great rigmarole follows to ensure everyone
has a good view, but it's worth it - those who missed the first view
are greatly cheered (and would presumably be mildly heartbroken to
have missed it).

We eventually roll on, taking in more boggy sections (not a lot
happening here barring some temporarily distracting detritus), more
heathy sections (Stonechat, a few Goldfinch) and some sandy coniferous
areas (usual suspects, tits, Goldcrest, Treecreeper). The group breaks
up a bit in these areas and needs some diligent policing to get it
back together.

We soon start to near the Northern branch of the path we set out
on. Thickets of Gorse guard one side of it - we approach as near as we
can from the West, but we'll have to spot further North to get round
the giant Gorse wall in our way. As we approach, I glimpse a very
Dartford Warbler like shape (long tail, some hints of the colouration)
flitting from the impenetrable barrier to a smaller bush a little way
towards us. Either I totally imagine this, or it flitted further than
I thought; an intensive search of any sprig within a few metres of
where I thought it landed yields no fruit.

I'm mildly peeved to not have had any help - everyone else is looking
at something else on the right, and making quite a lot of noise about
it. I pay a bit more attention. A quick look finds me a
Stonechat. Surely not that. There's a scruffy looking lark like bird a
bit further back. Commentary from the right is starting to suggest it
might be Woodlark. Excitement - that's a bird I've basically written
off for the year, assuming that, after a brief visible period during
spring passage, it would have disappeared into any available wood to
breed, becoming utterly unbirdable in the process. I get out the bird
book to see what I should be looking for; the diagnostic we're after
is a white-black-white border at the base of the wings.

This bird behaves admirably, sitting still in perfect light for long
periods. We have plenty of opportunity to pick out the wing pattern,
and to discuss the slight shabbiness of the crest (possible, late in
season, the book says). This is without doubt a Woodlark. Life tick!
The Dartford near miss is a distant memory as we link back up with the
path and move South again...

...Until someone else spots one, and their specimen performs the
same vanishing act mine did. They seem confident with their id,
despite much joshing; good on them! Well, if there are two Dartfords,
perhaps there will be a third. I'm suddenly on a cricket pitch, with
burly enthusiasts shouting "one brings two" encouragingly after my
bowling has taken a wicket (not a frequent occurrence). What a wonderful device 
the memory is.

We arrive back near the car park and set up for a picnic next to a
pond-lake hybrid. Someone's brought some delicious home grown
cherries; they disappear very quickly. By the time we're ready to head
out on our second loop, the light is starting to fade - I stash my
scope paraphernalia in Nigel's boot - I've been carting it about for
nearly twelve hours and my shoulders are starting to complain - and we
head back out onto the common.

We mostly follow the same path we took the first time, but at a
particular point we must have turned right, rather than left, because
I suddenly find that we're on a path I don't recognise. We get briefly
distracted by a Goldfinch showing signs of being exciting, and then,
after a series of curvy paths, we do it again, with the same bird.

We do come across a family of Redstarts in some thin woodland edge.
This time Andrew Peel is the surprisingly accurate predictor of their
appearance - he does his best to reassure us that these aren't magical
powers, but that he's seen them in this exact place several
times. This matches Mum's experience; her Redstart was sourced from a
local birder who was able to give very precise directions to it.

The thin woodland breaks down into heathland again, and we're
surrounded by little spiky bushes. There's a Stonechat in at least two
of them, of course. "Dartford!" Eh? That's a Stonechat, isn't it? "No,
same bush, lower down". Aha, with you, yes, thank you! Definitely a
Dartford. The group enters a mild panic trying to get everyone on it;
perhaps the slightly more switched on half succeed. The bird vanishes
after twenty or so seconds. That's about par for the course with
Dartford Warbler; to see it at all is not easy, as our three brief
sightings (in a group of decent birders in an environment where
they're supposed to be common) perhaps shows.

The light is seriously struggling as we reach a sandy crossroads in a
more open area. There are thickets and copses nearby, but nothing too
dense. Now we wait. Hopefully not for too long, as my earlier
coat-free decision is slowly starting to appear foolish.

The encroaching darkness sharpens our ears, and we start to pick up
faraway hints of what we're after. The sound of a Nightjar sounds
almost mechanical - one of two frequencies of a whirring (or possibly
clicking?) sound. I'm not going to do it justice - go and have a
listen on xeno canto, and then try and imagine hearing that sound from
two or three directions, in a wild heath. Right - you're here.

Unfortunately, the rules as agreed require me to see a bird; even if
its call is totally unmistakable. How tricky will
that be, I wonder. Much staring into the murk follows. The diligent
Andrew Peel yet again comes to the rescue, finding a bird book example
of a Nightjar sitting in a nearby birch tree.

I needn't have worried. As we walk back to the car park we see several
more, mostly in flight in the lightly wooded areas, making their
clicky whirring sound as they go. Tremendous.

We return to the car park somewhere between eight or nine. I remember
approximately two minutes of the return journey to Ealing, so I'm
guessing I was almost instantaneously asleep - hardly surprising,
having been out and about all day. What a day though - eight ticks,
two lifers; marvellous.

Another week flies by, and we're back at Oare marshes, this time in
search of Temminck's Stint. I've even managed to rope Emma into this
particular jaunt, having convinced her that, given we're going to see
her brother in South-East London later in the day, we may as well be
in North Kent for the bit of day preceding that.

As a result, we arrive at a rather more leisurely time - just after
noon, rather than before nine in the morning! There's still a
substantial group of birders occupying the parking spaces on the road
that splits the East and West flood; a good sign, as that's where I'd
guess we're most likely to pick up the Temminck's.

The group is mixed ability and mixed motivation - some are looking for
Black-winged Stilt. Others are in search of Napoleon. A few need
directing to the Curlew Sandpipers, which are still on the same muddy
island as last week. We eventually find a couple of professionals who
have seen the Temminck's today - their advice is to keep an eye on the
edge of the mud that protrudes out from the road, so we do.

This protrusion (could it be called a spit?) is long and thin, and
covered in various other waders and a good number of roosting
gulls. There's some distraction as someone works out that one of them
is the Bonaparte's, which, in only a week, has already started to
moult into slightly less obvious plumage.

We track the boundary between the mud and the East Flood's water. On
the left site of the arm of mud extending into the water, there is a
tiny wader dibbling about that could well be our bird. We have nearby
professionals, and we choose to use them. "Folks, is that the
Temminck's mucking about on the left there?" After a bit of extra
directional prodding, we get confirmation, indeed, that is it. Well,
that was easy. What to do now? Well, we might as well have a tour
around the reserve; it's a lovely day for it. Perhaps we'll bump into
last week's dipped White-rumped Sandpiper?

We make our way round the back of the East flood, encountering,
humouring, and finally abandoning some dragonfly enthusiasts on the
way. We have a good look at the Stilts from the sea wall, and the
reedbed once again refuses to give up any Bearded Reedling. From the
corner hide, we find some Ringed Plover (always an Emma favourite) and
admire some Curlew. Ah, there's something we can do - we should check
to see if any of these Curlew are actually Whimbrel, as someone on the
kentos website has reported seeing one or two along the Swale.

This is a good way to lose several hours of your life - these two
species can be tedious to separate. The two pictures in the bird book
showing Whimbrel versus juvenile Curlew are basically identical
barring some tricky to discern head markings on the Whimbrel. Still;
having seen a Whimbrel in Fuerteventura earlier in the year, I feel a
bit more confident that I might be able to pick one out.

A good hundred yards West along the mud is what I think is a
reasonable candidate. We'll get a bit closer and have a better
look. Lots of murmuring and staring at the bird book. The bill looks
right (not too big, curving suddenly at the end rather than in one
graceful arc), and the bird certainly has a more slender air than some
of the (borderline chunky) Curlews nearby. A little bit closer, and
with the sun shining on it just right, and I can see the humbug
colouration on its head. I think we're ready to call this a
Whimbrel. We rope in a fellow telescope wielder and he
agrees. Excellent. We get our Whimbrel-confirming friend on to
Napoleon (who is, once again, very near the slipway end of the mud)
and head back to the road view of the East flood to see if there's any
more news, and to get a final view of the Temminck's before we head
off.

There isn't a great deal more news, everything is where we left it. A
grass snake has a swim in the shallows - probably cooling off; it's
really rather hot at this point. A family of Water Rail make an
appearance off to the left, and, having missed it last week, I nearly
deal myself a neck injury with the speed at which I snap round to see
them. Needlessly, as they make very leisurely progress across the
front of the reeds before, inevitably, deciding that's enough exposure
for this week, and heading back in. If we labelled Water Rail as
'Easy' on the spread sheet we were overconfident, they can be such
secretive sods that even in places where they turn up week in/week out
you can miss them.

Another valuable trip to Oare - for me, probably the UK's best birding
place per square metre - comes to an end. We head back to Faversham to
connect with a train back to London, via a refresher at the Railway
Arms, as we discover the next one is more than half an hour away.

The numerically inclined among the readership are presumably on the
edges of their seats, at this point. So am I! There's nothing within
easy range of London on the Sunday or we'd be heading out to find it.

I am tormented throughout the week by continued reports of a pair of
Black-necked Grebe at Staines Reservoirs. Staines, in a previous
abode, was under an hour away; borderline accessible. Nowadays, from
home, despite its short crow flying distance, it's more like two hours
either way. Worse, this weekend is spoken for - we're heading to the
North-East to see the Dixons (and a pair of other couples).

A great deal of time is spent examining the possible routes from work
to Staines. Bike is best, but mostly consists of riding along the
cycle paths alongside the A4, which get interrupted every couple of
hundred metres by side roads. It's also not short; Google Maps makes
it at least an hour's solid ride. With the current hours of daylight
this would leave probably forty-five minutes of time to actually find
the bird. Which will also be tricky, as cycling that far with the
mulepack on is a non-starter, as it inevitably ends up bashing the
attached telescope against my bike helmet. So, it's going to be forty
five minutes to find a small, frequently underwater bird, on one of
two giant reservoirs, an hour's cycle away, on potentially dangerous
roads. That has dip written all over it. I resist making the attempt
until the Wednesday night, by which time I realise being one away is
starting to mess with me, and action must be taken (we don't need the
keys we'll break in).

The ride there is more eventful than I'd hoped - a very poor decision
on a roundabout leads to some emergency braking that almost sends me
over my handlebars. Shit shit shit. Thankfully, a part of my hind
brain that has been watching Peter Sagan very closely has worked out
how to go from somersaulting through someone's rear windscreen to a
borderline graceful dismount. The bike goes vertical, but I gently
pirouette off, postman style, landing on both feet, and arresting the
bike before it reverts to being a mess in the back of someone else's
car. I feel the acrobatics deserve rounding off with a bow, but then
the more sensible parts of my brain drag me off the road and on to the
nearest pavement, uttering constant loud apologies all the way. Oops.

Everything seems ok (catching the bike cost me a small bit of skin
off my arm, but I am otherwise unharmed), so I continue. The rest of
the route proves to be considerably less eventful - I'm left wondering
if I should write to whoever designed the cycle path's interaction
with that roundabout, but I eventually conclude my own idiocy is
entirely to blame.

I reach the East end of Staines Reservoirs just before 7pm - on
schedule. The site is two large reservoirs, divided East-West by a
causeway that you can walk along. Heathrow airport lurks a short
distance from the North of the reserve, so there are bonus aviation
ticks every forty seconds or so.

The Westward walk across the causeway is basically pointless, the sun
is in front of me, and I am looking at silhouettes. That doesn't stop
me staring at every single Grebe and Coot I can see for signs of
interest, but I don't try too hard. If I'm going to find this thing, I
suspect I'm going to find it on the way back.

I reach the causeway section where the fencing becomes too annoying to
look through and turn back. Internally, I am making peace with myself
that it would be OK to come here and not find this bird - it's still a
pleasant evening, and I have the place to myself; what a thing it is
to be a birder, and have a location all to yourself in the middle (ok, ok, the 
outskirts) of a major city.

I manage to convince myself that the North reservoir is free of
Black-necked Grebe (there just aren't that many birds in the central
part of the reservoir, where I'd expect the bird to be, and those that
are there are clearly not what I'm looking for). The South side is
much busier in the centre with a mixture of Black-headed Gulls and
Great Crested Grebes. Hmm. No joy from here - let's try a bit further
along.

This stop/stare/go policy gets me half way back to where I
started. More staring at the inhabitants to the South. A grebe
surfaces that looks, well, different - its profile is smaller and
lower than that of anything else around it. It also looks
fluffier. That could well be BNG. I walk a bit further along the
causeway to close the lateral distance between us - at the moment,
this is right on the edge of what my binoculars can do.

A slightly closer look picks out some finer details - I can see the
two-tonedness of the body, and even a hint of the 'ears'. Twenty odd
metres to one side, the other half of the pair is just diving. Great
success! An extended celebratory jig is performed (another benefit of
having the place to myself) and I then calm down to have another
look. Yes, still Black-necked Grebe. 200! Excellent. 

Now to figure out how to get home. Cycling is marginally slower than
public transport, so it's a short ride to Ashford (Surrey) to pick up
a train to Waterloo, then a short ride from there to Blackfriars for a
train to West Hampstead, and then another short ride home (arriving
just before 10pm - I'm glad I'm not going to need to do this again).

So, two hundred, by, for the record, the 25th July. That is
considerably earlier than I was expecting. Quite a lot of the year
still remains - a careful balance will have to be struck between going
after every possible tick between now and then and grounds for
divorce. I guess we'll see how that goes - this weekend at least
should be bird free, and full of friends.

An only mildly delayed train to Newcastle sees us arrive at the
Dixons' for just after half past ten on the Friday. In the house also
are the family Eccles; the smallest of whom is thankfully fast
asleep. We all celebrate this fact with a quiet glass of
wine. Tomorrow, the Ashforths arrive (with another small child) and
social events (and, I predict, _unbelievable_ levels of faff) will occur.

Having seen several editions of "spending the morning with your
friends and their ~2 year old" and also having found an interesting
possibility of a tick a short Metro journey away, Saturday morning finds me 
exiting house Dixon like a shot. I'll catch up with everyone once the Ashforths 
have arrived and everyone has got organised.

Within an hour, I'm already at the most salubrious location of East
Boldon. Nearby, at East Boldon Flats, there's been a report of three
Wood Sandpiper. This is, without question, the least glamorous place I
am likely to bird this year. The exit to the Metro station is guarded
by an average looking pub and some low density commercial buildings. A
pizza place hiding within it looks cheerful, mind. The walk to the
flats is equally unappealing, there are no pavements and a grass verge
of only limited width, next to an A-road with national speed limits
(60mph). It's also starting to rain, and the signs are that it's going
to really cane it down in an hour or so. I hope the waterproof I've
borrowed from Dixon holds up.

The reserve itself is almost totally inaccessible and can only be
viewed from a pair of laybys. There are two cars parked in one of
them; a couple next to the nearest one have set up a telescope. I can
see evidence of someone trying to scope from inside the second car (a
worthy but nigh on impossible feat).

I don't immediately feel like asking for assistance - having reached
the arbitrary 200, I can afford to dip a few species in the name of
becoming a better birder. One would hope that the sheer worthiness of
venturing out to this unfriendly place in such miserable weather is
already helping on that front.

The site itself is a shallow watercourse that's probably a couple of
hundred metres square. It has extensive muddy edges that look
excellent for waders. I'm going to need these sandpipers to be on one
of the nearer shores, but ideally on the right or left edge, as the
front is obscured by foliage. There are the usual Lapwings and Redshanks
poking about (occasionally the Lapwings misidentify a fly as a raptor
and, en masse, take to the sky, protesting noisily). I wonder if
Lapwings are mostly becoming red listed just by being the thickest
birds on the scrape.

A few minutes of searching and I can happily rule out the areas I can
easily see. Humph. Ok, time to try the front edge - perhaps something
will gambol far enough out to be identified.

A Redshank does make a brief foray out of the undergrowth, with some
friends. The friends are smaller. Interesting. They make their way
left until, after some time. I can see that their legs are in no way
red; they are perhaps a yellowy colour. As I look more, the hallmarks of 
Wood Sandpiper start to become clearer - the gently speckled chest, the
supercilium. Not pale enough for Green Sandpiper, no armpits (so not
Common Sandpiper), too small and again, not pale enough for
Greenshank. Also, there are three of them, which matches the
BirdGuides report. Wood Sandpiper they are!

This is an excellent turn up for the books, and a well timed one too,
because the rain now arrives big style. I shelter under a ridiculously
small (yet strangely effective) bush until we're back to drizzle rather than
downpour, and then head back to the Metro station. I check my phone to
see if the child-bearing party has got its boots on, and find an empty
WhatsApp. I end up having enough time in the town centre to run a
couple of errands before everyone else arrives. A delightful day of
museums, sitting about and chatting follows.

The next day, it is decided that the group is going to
Durham. Precisely what will happen there is left ill-defined. To a
point where, as the car with us arrives in it, we decide to disrupt
the plan and go on a walk around the city centre rather than visiting
the effective garden centre the forward party decided to head
to. This, remarkably, turns out alright - the garden centre crew have
a jolly time there, and we get to walk up the bailey and give the
cathedral a bit of a walk around. 

This is only the second time I've been back to Durham since
graduating, and walking the Bailey triggers some strong muscle
memories - mostly from my feet - they remember some of the routes
better than I do. On these cobbles a wallet flew out of my coat as I
fled back to moatside at speed - for reasons lost to history. A pretty
girl in my year picks it up, and returns it to me as I sprint back up,
with a smile I'm too embarrassed to properly process. More cobbles. Another 
memory, clearer this time, "don't rush here, you've fallen over on at least 
two occasions". Perhaps its my arse remembering that rather than my feet. The
concrete bunker of the DSU hoves into view, and my mind's eye replays a 
poorly attended Biffy Clyro gig and some effort to obtain some terrible Smirnoff
merchandise. Wasn't there a Peters' bakery over there once? And didn't
we try to steal that sign one evening? Hmm. Come on Byatt, back to
reality.

We head to the Court Inn for a late lunch - much wrangling with smalls
follows, but some adult conversation is just about maintained. Eventually, we
say goodbye to both Eccleses and Ashforths, and are left in Durham with the 
Dixons. Who, it happens, are ripe for a bit of adventure before our train, 
which I can happily provide, in the form of a quest to Blackhall Rocks, on 
the coast. Why? Well, there's a raft of a few hundred scoters there, and, 
amongst them are both Velvet and Surf Scoters, both of which would be life 
ticks.

Having convinced everyone this is an amazing plan, I'm now somewhat
tense. I don't have a scope, and I suspect I am going to need one. I
also have little idea of where we're going once we get there. I am
hoping there are going to be other birders to make it clear.

There are _plenty_ of other birders. And, handily, my compatriots are
less fussed about identification than I am, after a bit of ribbing,
the Dixons disappear off to a nearby bit of beach, having realised
this is _serious business_. We're on top of a short cliff, perhaps
twenty metres above sea level. The scoter raft is perhaps a couple of
hundred metres out.

Its the biggest raft I've ever seen - easily three hundred birds,
perhaps four with the little flotillas disjoint from the main group. In them 
we're going to need to find two or three that have slightly different plumage
and head shape. I tune my ears into the chat of the seven or eight birders 
with scopes perched on the top to try to reduce the area I need to look in.

This is a struggle - the top of this cliff is windy, and the
differences we're looking for are small. The Surf Scoter has a
maniacal looking pattern of colours on its bill and a couple of white
patches on its head. The Velvet cousin has a white 'wink' of an
eyepatch, and a white patch on its flank. We're looking for two of the
latter, and one of the former.

My eyes are watering with the strain of focussing on these birds; just
as with the Wood Sandpipers, they're right at the edge of what can be
reasonably looked at. That said, I'm pretty confident I've found the
Surf Scoter - it's at the left hand side of the largest group. One of
the 'scope wielders takes pity on me - "I've got it, have a look". A
thousand thank yous from both of my eyes. I was right though - that is
the Surf Scoter. I yield the eyepiece to Ems and make gracious
noises. The other birders also offer up their scopes - we've
definitely landed amongst a most charitable group; we must have passed
some regional hazing test by being prepared to stare for so long with
just binoculars.

Confidence restored by the confirmation of the Surf, I'm energised to
try and find the Velvets with the bins as well. Heh, and, you know
what, I can - they're actually not far from the Surf - although
describing this precisely is challenging. It's quite remarkable how clearly 
they show up once you've found them - the eye is clear once you've picked out
the flank/wing pattern.

We'd better go and find the Dixons - they'll surely be making trouble
wherever they are. Indeed. Steve is finding large rocks and flinging
them at the sea on a nearby shingly beach. That Geology degree was worth 
every penny. Some further scoters are lounging nearby - it's quite remarkable
how close in some of the subrafts are - this is _easily_ the best view I've 
ever had of them. We mess about on the beach for a while longer, leave once, 
return to find Kate's phone, and then it's back to Newcastle (and, for us, 
London).

July ends. 203 is the count. A gentle August will surely follow.

August is not traditionally a productive birding month in any
case. We've already collected most of what could be August targets in
a monster July performance, too. Very few attempts at increasing the
total occur, as a result. 

Two fine friends marry outside in Shropshire, and set a record for
'most birds of prey visible during a wedding', with Buzzard, Red Kite
and Peregrine all making an appearance. A nearby wooded area of
Wenlock Edge has young flycatchers and warblers galore, but nothing
new for the year. The valley below has poorly maintained paths and, by
the end of Sunday, my ill-advisedly short trouser adorned legs are
somewhat scratched, and my shoes wet.

Towards the end of the month, however, things start to happen. Several
Black Terns are repeatedly reported off Gallions Reach. I've been
looking for an excuse to acquaint myself with that area of the Thames
for a while - the penultimate weekend of August seems like a good one.

The weather has other ideas. It's a very damp looking day even as
I head out. An hour on the tube and DLR only worsens conditions - it's
a borderline downpour as I touch out at Gallions Reach DLR. Here's
hoping my telescope's jacket is waterproof - it certainly claims to
be.

Access to the Thames on the North side is, to start with, quite simple
- there's what feels like the start of a promenade area next to some
new build apartment blocks. It isn't exactly welcoming (the promenade
abruptly ends as the housing development stops and becomes a heavily
fenced off patch of rough undeveloped land) but it does offer a good
view of a decent section of river.

A quick scan with the bins finds a maelstrom of gulls and terns a
couple of hundred metres downriver. Enough of an excuse to try the
scope, at least.

The usual faff with the tripod quickly dispensed with, I now peer at
the gull/tern cloud. They're almost exactly far away enough to make
this difficult - even with the scope, the number of eye pixels taken
up by each bird makes it tricky to differentiate between gull and
tern, never mind between gull and tern species.

Thankfully, even at this time of year, Black Tern should still retain
enough of its naming plumage to be differentiable. This should just be
a waiting game if the birds are present, and, before long, I find a
couple of birds flying around in a tern like fashion, while being
altogether too small and dark to be Common Terns. An annoyingly crappy
view of Black Tern, but Black Tern nonetheless.

It would, I decide, be good to have a better view. A brief look at
Google Maps' satellite view suggests that may be possible. Ideally,
one would use what looks like a perfectly serviceable riverside path,
but it is locked up behind a serious looking fence. We must be far
enough East that the Thames Path is no longer a thing - a real shame!
I make a mental note to write to someone about this and complain.

To go downstream then, we'll have to go in, along, and out again. I
turn right at the show house for what the inaccessible wasteland will
eventually be covered with. Would it be so hard for them to keep
access to the river open?

This road is pretty miserable - Buddleia-strewn abandoned concrete
lots on both sides, with no sign of the river at all. A roundabout
that once offered a road towards the river now offers more giant
fencing and gates equipped with very serious notices (and, more
importantly, locks and spikes). I am repelled.

The next option is a small retail park, which looks as if it may have,
from its rear, a path that eventually allows river access. All trace
of it has disappeared under a thicket of brambles.

The retail park does allow a brief break for lunch. The outlet of
Boots as at the "we're going to throw these sandwiches out in ten
minutes" stage, so it's a high calorie, high value, mediocre quality
(2 sets of sandwiches: £1.50 total) affair.

Refreshed, I am ready for my final assault on the river. A marked
footpath is available from the exit of the retail park. It has _users_
- I see four other people and a cyclist using it. It looks like I may
be able to enter Beckton sewage works from this path; which ought to
avail me of a better view of these terns. Dave Morrison often birds
from the sewage works, so that must surely work.

Once again though, I am stymied. This is not really a path, and there
is no way through these giant gates. The only other access options are
another twenty minutes through what my SimCity trained brain is now
labelling as 'low density commercial/industrial zoning, i.e minging'
areas. And these first few attempts have taken their toll, not least
upon my coat, which is feeling rather brambled. A crappy view is going
to have to do.

Having vainly pursued a better view without a real plan, I'm now a
forty minute bus from useful transport. I console myself by eating
sandwich number two, and then start the journey home. Next time I'm
going to try this from the other side of the river.

A relaxed August with only a single tick. 204.

September rolls round, and I am blessed with a renewed resolve, and,
through good behaviour and a cunning deployment of miniature railways,
an Emma who is prepared to try a Dungeness outing.

It's a good job there's a miniature railway involved - the journey
would be unsellable otherwise - Northern to Pancras, HS1 and change to
tiny Kentish station (tm), taxi, and finally, Romney, Hythe and
Dymchurch railway for the final leg.  It really is a remarkably small
train! Exactly half way between Hornby and and actual train. You sit
in pairs, on mildly uncomfortable seats. There's possibly a foot of
headroom on cars that are roofed. Views over the surrounding
countryside are good, but not particularly elevated! No trolley
service, but one of the middle stations has ice creams on the
platform. Smart.

As well as being small, the train is _slow_ - it takes 75 minutes to
traverse the 20 odd miles to Dungeness. My inner cyclist is itching at
such a slow pace, particularly when I see several railway-side paths
aggressively labelled as not for cycling.

We arrive in Dungeness. It is seriously hot. It is also rather
dangerously close to lunchtime, and once we set off on our walk the
opportunities for food will be rather limited. We dive into a nearby
pub (The Britannia Inn) for a rapid fish and chips, and easily the
worst pint of the year so far. Kentish pubs. Sort your pipes out.

Post pub, we give the sea a brief staring at. Nothing of note. The
famed sewage outlets are sufficiently gulled, but not by any species
of particular note. We turn inland, heading for the bird
observatory. Plenty of activity there! (Note: was a rarity reported? I
seem to remember there was) unfortunately, all of it is human - lots
of people looking, and not finding. A few are mucking about with nets.

A conversation or two yields no exciting news - the rough 'desert' ENE
of the observatory has apparently had a group of Whinchat in it. The
internet has also told tale of several Lesser Whitethroat. We shall
see.

We head in that general direction and immediately encounter
Wheatear. Always a pleasure. It finds several Wheatear compatible
perch points: old concrete block, tick, railway sleepers, tick, patch
of grass near a fence, tick. Lovely.

Next, we descend into a patch of trees. These are almost entirely
silent. No movement. We hurry on through, a single Common Whitethroat
our only accompaniment.

The path, such as it is, opens out into less densely shrubbed scrubby
stuff. This is chat territory. Off to the left there are several
watercourses, and some bramble encrusted willows bordering. Several
tit flocks are peeping their way along them.

Nothing much else happens for at least a kilometre, and then
_everything_ kicks off. One or two Stonechats multiply into many more,
perhaps getting into double figures. We check them diligently for
Whinchat - having been starved of anything to look at we've got plenty
of focus to spend. Several Common Whitethroat are sharing the same
tangled shrubs, so we get stuck here for several minutes.

A pair of Whinchat are eventually differentiated - and they're in
pretty good nick - noticeably cleaner than the birds we saw in
Scotland. Still not the pinnacle of Whinchat occurrences though - I'm
mindful of a trip to Wanstead where we saw seven in the space of a
couple of minutes, at considerably closer quarters and (just as
importantly) less far from home!

I take a brief break from chats and give the treeline running parallel
to the waterline a bit of a look. There's a couple of birds making
their way along it; more Common Whitethroat? A look through the
bins...does not confirm. They might even be Lesser Whitethroat, you
know - there's none of the warm colour palette common would have.

They're rather too far away to be sure. The pair seem unfazed by our
approach, so, after a brief attempt with the scope, we get near enough
to pick out the details just with the binoculars. Yep. Lesser
Whitethroat. They exist. That wasn't even difficult. Apart from the
three plus hour journey to get here, and the fact that we're in
Britain's only desert, on one of the year's hottest days. Easy.

We eventually exit the desert on to the main road that leads to
Dungeness RSPB. This road is _miserable_ - straight, flat, exposed,
featureless and with nowhere for pedestrians, and therefore not at all
safe. I have walked it once before in almost opposite conditions -
wet, cold, and blowing a gale and I struggle to say which was
worse. Amusingly, that other walk was for the same bird - Cattle Egret.

This time, the bird has been reported on the RSPB reserve; previously
I had to skulk across the reserve and then up to some farm buildings
even further away. There should even be time to do a quick circuit of
the reserve in question, although, eesh - given how long it's taken us
to get here, it'll have to be rapid. The RSPB map reckons we need an
hour. 

That should be plenty; while the reserve is well maintained and has
some excellent hides, it is often better in the Winter, when it boasts
spectacular wildfowl numbers. We briefly tarry in one of the hides and
spot a pair of Black Tern (_so_ glad to have spent a day failing to
get a view half this good on the Thames the other week) and admire a
flock of hirundines feasting in the sunshine. And, to be honest, enjoy
walking along something that isn't that bloody road.

The end of our circuitous walk brings us back to the reserve's
entrance track. We've walked this one way already. Now for the return
journey. Cattle Egret, can, apparently, be found with the cattle off
to one side of the entrance track. We gave this field a decent look on
the way in, but, to be completely honest, were too much in need of
refreshment to look properly.

I suspect we'll have more luck now - two cars are parked up on the
track, and a group well equipped with 'scopes is gathered near
them. We set up camp within earshot and tune in to what appear to be
the primary birder's commentary. The egret is, apparently, moving with
the cattle, from right to left. At the moment, it's obscured by two or
three cows in front of it. There are hints of it between legs now and
again - a flash of white in a sea of yellows and greens. Eventually
the gaps between cows is perfect, and the whole bird is visible.

Ok, excellent, great. Unfortunately, we have to go; less than an hour
remains before the last train back to civilisation, and according to
Google Maps it will take us three quarters of an hour to get
there. Along that sodding road again. Ugh. I hypnotise myself into a
marching rhythm, only interrupted by an excellent fencepost Kestrel.

Eventually we make it back to the miniature railway terminus, and
recover from our latest baking with a fizzy drink. We bag seats in one
of the open top cars on the way back, which cools us off
nicely.

That was hard work. Trying to do both the NNR and the RSPB reserve
using the railway was a bridge too far - neither really got the
attention they perhaps deserved. We totally ignored the sea bar a very
quick look, too. I leave with the same impression as last time, that
this site would be better experienced in a car, having stayed in a
place not too far away.

We reach the middle of September and a few more species start to make
a break back to the continent. The swifts have already made a hasty
disappearance. Swallows and martins are on the move too. More
excitingly, reports from Staines Reservoirs bring news of a good
twenty odd Yellow Wagtails gamboling around on the causeway.
Now. Yellow Wagtail is reported a lot on passage, often in ones and
twos. I have, in previous entries, completely omitted all mention of
this happening, because they are _never_ there. The closest we've come
to picking up Yellow Wagtail somewhere it's been reported was at Oare,
where an overenthusiastic birder tried to make a very worn Pied
Wagtail into a juvenile. Most reports are flyovers, we suspect, and so
we've got into the habit of dismissing them out of hand.

Twenty, though? Twenty might be worth the pain in the arse journey
that Staines is from home. I quiz the reporter on twitter; he confirms
that the birds are both numerous and on the ground. It's a beautiful
day, let's get out there.

A couple of hours later, we find ourselves at the Eastern entrance to
the causeway. One small bonus of the route: a McDonald's just before
the reservoirs, which provided some suddenly much needed sustenance.

I suddenly realise Emma probably hasn't been here before, so provide a
quick briefing on the weirdness of the site, remind her of its
hallowed status as bird 200 provider, etc. Unusually for a trip to
Staines, we're (hopefully) not going to be spending huge amounts of
time staring at the water in search of our quarry, and it's not the
middle of the Winter.

We get up to the causeway, and for the first time ever I am glad of
the constant wind it receives - the sun is hot and unburdened by
clouds, and without the cooling breeze the heat would be borderline
unpleasant.

It's immediately clear that there are large numbers of wagtails on the
causeway; even from here I'm guessing there are at least ~100 odd
scattered about - some sitting on the fences, others picking about at
the base, some just have a sit down in the middle of the path. All
I've got at the moment are Pied, however.

A closer look would help. Heck, we're planning to go and explore
Staines Moor afterwards anyhow, so we need to make our way across
anyway. We reach the non-annoying area of fencing and take another
look. We're surrounded by wagtails now - some that we disturbed have
now retaken their positions behind us, and many we are yet to bother
ahead. Both groups, now we are nearer, obviously contain several
Yellow Wagtail (despite the variance between different YW subspecies,
it's very clear how they differ from the pieds). Excellent. I dash out
a quick message to the original reporter to say thanks; the sheer
number of birds present has already made this a worthwhile journey.

We spend a while taking terrible photos of the wagtails (they aren't
quite tame enough to let us get close enough, and the heat haze adds
another unwanted blur filter on top of that), before moving on to
Staines Moor.

Once off the causeway, we're into one of the less glamorous parts of
this trip - walking up the road dividing Staines reservoirs from the
neighbouring King George VI reservoir. The boredom is briefly lifted
by yet more Yellow Wagtails (a group of six are making their way along
the fence line at the top of the KGVI), but it's still otherwise a
straight and featureless bit of road. Fortunately it is short (unlike
the Dungeness one), and before too long we're on a scruffy little
footpath cutting between the KGVI and the village of Stanwell Moor.

I've encountered Little Owl in the farmland adjacent to the path here
before, so I am reasonably alert, scanning suitable perch points for
any sign of them. Nothing doing though.

The landscape opens out in front of us and a little information panel
tells us we have reached Staines Moor. This is easily the best I've
seen it look. One could almost forget the M25 borders it.

We're not far into the moor when we spot two large birds carving
around in the middle of it. They're basically silhouetted against the
summer sky. My initial thought is Red Kite. Indeed, one of them, when
turning, shows off a forked tail. Probably both Red Kites
then. Hmm. Or not. The other seems a different shape. Best to keep
watching.

The definite kite and the mystery go their separate ways at this
point, the kite heading South-East, and the mystery, usefully, along
the River Colne, towards us. It's not just a heron, is it? That might
have tried to mod a kite, I suppose. No. Wrong flap.

The bird drops down a bit so it's below the skyline; the contrast
reveals some of its colours, and more of its shape. Bloody hell,
that's an Osprey!

A hurried few seconds are spent convincing Emma (who sensibly thinks I
am making stuff up) of this fact. Any doubt is swiftly erased by the
bird diving into the river in an attempt to catch a fish not fifty
yards from us. Amazing! We scoot around a little so that the bird
spends more time with us between the sun and it. What a tremendous
sight it is - all of the detail of the bird is revealed; the curve in
the beak, the yellow eye, the white of the underside. Our only failure
is in capturing any of these details; we're far too excited to take
any decent photographs! We manage a decent few record shots that will
later briefly propel us to South-West London/Surrey birding
celebrities, but none of them really convey how bloody brilliant it
was to find such a showy Osprey in the middle of a moor next to the
M25.

We put out the news. The Osprey knows how that works, and buggers off
South over the bypass at the earliest available opportunity. I'm glad
we have photographic proof. We check in with another birder who has
been making his way around the opposite side of the river with more
serious photographic equipment. He's done rather better than we have
in the contrast stakes (i.e there is some contrast), but his
excitement seems muted. We let him be and head towards the bypass
ourselves; the path back to the station goes underneath it.

I'm expecting an uneventful remainder of walk at this
point. Incorrectly, it turns out. Our crossing of the river is barred
by an assortment of horses. They do a mixture of staring at us and
ignoring us, but show no sign of getting out of the way. We decide to
break the deadlock by walking directly at the bridge - slow panic
ensues; the group retreats twenty odd metres upstream and then plunge
into the water, before resuming the staring contest from the other
side of the bridge. Helpful.

We cross the bridge, and they've had enough of being near us at all,
and stalk off towards some cattle off to our right. Another pair of
Yellow Wagtail are mucking about around the cattle on our way; props
to them for having read the bird book.

We exit the moor under the bypass and cross some sort of
canal. Looking along it, there's a well concealed Buzzard in the trees
off to its right. Definitely a Buzzard, and not the Osprey again, we
make sure. From here a delightful but dank path along another river
(Wraysbury?), a brief tour through a retail park (we decide against a
second McDonald's) and a secret passage alongside the railway line and
we're back on the train home.

A couple of fallow weeks follow. Birdguides is almost dead to me at
this point; new ticks are almost entirely more than four hours away
from London. Only one bird feels in range - a juvenile Pallid Harrier
is apparently hanging about on Therfield Heath. This looks doable -
train to Royston, and then ~40 minutes of walk. I've been in two minds
about trying this all week - it'll end up being at least two hours
each way (trains are infrequent) and this has all the hallmarks of a
dip. The frequency of sightings during the previous days and a very
empty looking Sunday plan are enough to get me out of the door.

Therfield Heath is an open space South-West of Royston. It harbours a
golf course and a rugby club, but still has some good rough patches
that look like they could support some wildlife. Within a couple of
minutes of reaching the heath, I'm four raptors up - Kestrel,
Sparrowhawk, Buzzard and Red Kite. Perhaps I've underestimated how
good a patch this is!

The heathland lies on the Northern side of a small hillock. The
reports I've got lead to the top of this hillock, where the heath
gives way to farmland. I accost a couple of locals for directions,
they reassure me I'm on the right track.

The boundary between the heath and the farmland is a decently dense
treeline, and it's full of littlies, including some very confiding
Chiffchaffs. The farmland shows deliberate signs of someone having
though about something other than crop yield; indeed, it seems like
some of this area is managed for wildlife primarily. Judging by my
experience so far, it's working a treat.

I hang about at the top with another birder for quarter of an hour. We
agree this is where we need to be, but there is no sign of the
Pallid. We go our separate ways (West for him, South for me) to
continue the search.

I've chosen better - not 200m down the footpath there are four chaps
with scopes hanging out. I beat a swift retreat to collect my previous
companion but he has managed to disappear - unless he's sprinted off,
he must have taken a different path to the one I explored.

This turns out to be a mistake - I arrive at this group and I've
apparently missed the Pallid by a couple of minutes. Typical. I get
the full lowdown from the group; apparently the bird has been doing
circuits of the area, but has frequently alighted on a perch point at
the border of this field and the next.

Much hanging about follows. Definitely a twitch. I'm glad, at this
point, that 200 was the goal. Something higher would need
substantially more outings of this nature, and they really aren't my
bag. I'm not patient enough; I like a good walk or cycle (or even a
drive) punctuated by wildlife, not a trek to a specific point followed
by a lot of uncertain waiting about.

The sun goes in and out a lot; this is pretty handy, temperature
wise. Less good for scanning the horizon, which needs doing - plenty
of Red Kites and Buzzards need to be ruled 'not Pallid', which we do
successfully.

During these scans, the Pallid has managed to sneak back on to its
previous perch without any of us noticing. Hilarious. The ridiculous
unmistakable orange is in evidence despite the average light. The bird
doesn't look entirely comfortable - one leg looks a bit mangled. Oh
dear. Eventually it decides to have a decent fly around and we're
treated to some views that are borderline generous. If, still,
slightly too far away for the camera I have with me. The bird then
buggers off South and goes out of view behind the trees that shelter
the footpath that heads that way.

I decide to attempt to follow it. Entirely unsuccessfully, despite
some intrepid scrambling through brambles, and scaring the living
daylights out of a deer. Another birder approaches; he mentions that
they often get Merlin on the ridge further down the path.

I doubt it. My birding experience has led me to believe the existence
of Merlin as a bird is about as mythical as the equivalent wizard;
I've been to several places where they're supposedly common (or, if
not common, seen most days) and they have been utterly absent. What I
can tell is that the Pallid must have turned about, as this chap
hasn't come across it.

The choice between mythical Merlin and now slightly better
triangulated Pallid is an easy one, I turn around and head back up to
the hill. The scope gang are still all present and correct. No sign of
the Pallid. I have a look around and find a Kestrel taking a break on
a telegraph wire. Somewhere nearby, a Yellowhammer tells repeatedly of
its desire for a diminutive cheese sandwich. This is a decent patch!
Lucky Royston.

The Pallid returns to great acclaim. This time it lands in a well
furrowed field that we have yet to stare at. Everyone files over to
stare at it. A couple of crows hang around nearby to add some possible
drama.

On the ground though, the birds seem to have collective blindness. The
Pallid hops past the crows within a couple of metres and no reaction
occurs. A similar nonaggression pact has obviously been agreed with a
Black-headed Gull, whose expression could not be more aloof.

Confounding our claims that it must have some food on the ground, the
Pallid takes off empty handed. This seems to break the terms of the
agreement with the crows, who are immediately in pursuit. The Pallid's
escape is great to watch, a few languid flaps and carves take it
easily away from the busy crows, its bright colours now clear in the
afternoon sunshine. We follow its progress as it summits the treeline,
quarters another nearby field, hops back over the trees and then
disappears off to the East. Cracking bird. Job done. Time to head
home; I bid a cheery farewell to the scope crew and set off back for
the station, where I will inevitably have just missed a train.

Another weekend rolls around. Spotted Crake fever is still in full
flow. Although the Willen Lake bird, in Milton Keynes, appears to have
moved on. If we're interested, we'll have to make our way to Wilstone
reservoir, in the productive birding county of Hertfordshire.

To my chagrin, this looks like a walk up and then back down the
wildlife black hole that is the Grand Union Canal. At least for Ring
Ouzel the outbound half was the Ridgeway, and the canal formed part of
a circuit. October is once again feeling very summery; perhaps a
picnic in the sunshine will make up for the dreary route.

I make a bold choice to abandon the scope in favour of lighter
equipment (and more food/water). This turns out well to start with -
it is _remarkably_ hot, and both Emma and I shed multiple layers into
a backpack that, had we brought the scope, not had the capacity to
cope.

The canal is typically bereft of interest. A couple of coots panic at
the sign of humans. A small flock of finches makes an appearance where
the towpath switches sides at a lovely old bridge. A huge effort is
required to not stop off at a canalside pub (The Grand Junction Arms)
that is reeking of delicious chips.

At this point the tree cover of the canal withdraws. The amount of
wildlife doesn't change much, but there is at least a horizon to scan,
which yields a couple of Red Kites. A friendly heron poses for some
photographs. We reach Tring Reservoirs nature reserve and things get
even better - tons of wildfowl, albeit not much of it particularly
interesting, despite some strong staring at from yours truly. Warnings
of Blue-green algae (we struggle to calibrate our fear meters) are
pockmarked around any paths down to the water's edge.

We cross the causeway between the two main reservoirs, risk life and
limb crossing Tringford road, then set up for a picnic alongside the
last branch of reservoir. It's suitably tranquil, but a bit insect
ridden. We wonder out loud whether it is safe for us to eat sandwiches
in a blue-green algae area. This discussion lasts as long as it takes
us to realise we are too hungry to care.

We're not far away now - just a couple of road sections and a short
track across a field, and we'll be at Wilstone reservoir's Cemetery
Corner, where our Crake has been spotted. The soundtrack, in my head,
immediately switches to Pantera's "Cemetery Gates".

We walk North-West along the reservoir's North-East side (the
reservoir is a rhombus with N/E/S/W corners). Conditions are not
ideal. The reedbed, which stretches from the Eastern corner, is almost
due South from where we are; the sun is in the South-West. A recipe
for sore eyes. In addition, a firm breeze is blowing from the North,
which, when the sun goes in, reduces the temperature to somewhere
below pleasant. Worst of all, only two birders other than us are
present, and they haven't seen anything.

Patience is going to be required. Goddamnit, it's another bloody
twitch! And, frankly, leaving the telescope behind has now proven to
be an idiotic decision; if I had to classify the difficulty of finding
this bird, it's up there with finding Jack Snipe from the tower hide
at Barnes WWT.

Our little group quickly starts to swell and soon we hit double
figures, and we're up to four scopes, two of which are _serious_
Swarovski affairs. Both Ems and I persist with binoculars; I try
various poses (sitting on the reservoir embankment's edge, lying
completely prone, a one knee flat yoga position that shall remain
nameless (unkempt donkey?)) to lessen the effects of the wind and the
light.

One chap intermittently makes excited noises for three or four
minutes. Everyone is too polite to enquire as to why, but tries to
decipher the source from his directions. Now, directing folks along a
reedbed edge is not simple, but this man has a talent for total
opacity. He could be describing almost any five metre stretch of it
from the level of detail we're getting. "Behind that Black-headed
Gull, and then left, behind a Coot". Well, yes, great. There are ten
to a hundred of both of those species floating around. Could you try a
different landmark, perhaps?

We eventually discover he has found not Spotted Crake but Jack Snipe -
worth a look for sheer scarcity purposes, but not a tick (it's been on
the list since the end of March). The group gets back to the serious
work of finding the Crake. Much chat circulates about its size and
identifying characteristics. A buff tail is about the only thing
everyone can agree on.

Emma, remarkably, is enjoying this experience immensely. I suspect
some of the enjoyment may have come from observing my transformation
into full-on twitch mode. Humph. It could also be the weather: the
interrupted sunshine means her instant-burn complexion is safe without
continuous application of sunscreen, and it's neither too warm or too
cold.

A further half hour or so of staring passes, and then a different
person starts to get excited. Their directions are _much_ better, and
before I know it I catch the most fleeting glimpse of a buff tail I
expect I will ever encounter, as the crake scurries back into the
reedbed having spent a precious moment or two visible on the edge.

Wow. That's not a lot of bird for quite a lot of work. We hang about a
bit in the hope of seeing a bit more, and eventually the bird segues
from elusive to showing abysmally - a few intermittent scurries along
the front of the reed bed, occasional occluded views a foot or two
within it. One of the better equipped scopes is offered around for
general use and that improves things, but I still come away with
little lasting impression other than that brief buff flourish.

We debate the relative pros and cons of walking back versus ordering a
taxi (a very short conversation bookended by an proudly covert wee
near the car park). Before too long we're on the train home, not quite
victorious, but successful, at least.

Two further weeks pass; trips to fall migration hotspots are turned
down in favour of a quiet life; again I am grateful to have picked
(and reached!) 200 already. A nearby twitch beckons, though - the gang
over at Wanstead have found a Rustic Bunting, and that's really too
near to ignore.

Of course, too near doesn't necessarily mean too convenient - Wanstead
is three or four public transport hops from Golders, but I've a decent
book on the go so this is no great hardship. I do like the flats;
there's something quite brilliant about such a forsaken feeling place
(there's _always_ a burnt out car somewhere on the flats - where do
they come from?) being so well birded, and yet also being so heavily
used (visit on a weekend and BE AMAZED by the amount of football
occurring).

I stumble out of a train in Leytonstone and walk, very determinedly,
towards the flats; there's enthusiasm in them there legs. I veritably
stomp my way across the two sections of the park that I have deemed
unlikely to contain a Rustic Bunting (by cunningly asking someone who
looked more birdy than footbally; top radar, that).

There are _crowds_ of people on the edge of where the bird has
previously been seen - easily fifty plus, with more arriving by the
minute. This is a bit weird. There is a lot of WhatsApp happening
between folks who have split into separate groups to encircle the area
of trees the bird's been seen in.

I make my way around to where the last sighting was - lots of hopeful
folks with scopes hanging around. There's some movement in the bushes
nearby, with a bird or two dropping out of cover to poke around on the
ground. This is definitely bunting behaviour, but the bunting in
question is Reed, and, on one occasion, Dunnock (i.e not a
bunting). There are claims of sightings from a few folks ("It's on a
twig just behind that leaaargh it went down again sorry" variety) but
not a lot else. Much jostling for position - this is like being at a
gig. Emma would _detest_ this; she has done well to bail.

I spend a bit of time fiddling with a camera. Separating Rustic from
Reed is not a task I expect to be up to on my own, so I want some
documentary evidence that I can review later for confirmation. I take
a couple of test shots of a Dunnock (perching very beautifully at the
summit of a nearby bush) and am pleased with the results - the bridge
camera has a phenomenal zoom, but can have trouble if the light isn't
perfect, having set it up for what seems to be average light
conditions I should at least have a chance.

A sudden tide in the crowd picks up, and we're off, circling around
the enclosure in a clockwise direction. This bird better like an
audience! We've perhaps traversed pi/2 radians around when we come to
a barrage of birders that's already two deep and twenty wide. We
surround them, widening and deepening the twitch. Between two pairs of
shoulders I can just about make out a bird foraging on the ground. Is
that it?

Thankfully there is commentary being provided: "It really likes this
area; I think someone put down food for it"; "There is just a hint of
pink in the bill, no?"; "That's definitely it then? Yep, that's
it". Ok then; I'd best try to convince myself I can tell the
difference.

A long couple of minutes follow. Some absolute oik decides to stand
about a foot in front of me. There is limited etiquette in twitching,
but if you move into a position and I can lick the back of your head,
I think we can both agree that you're not thinking about your
surroundings. I wait for them to fidget, and manage a few decent
frames of the suspected Rustic in the camera before suddenly it's off,
up over our heads and towards the broom field behind us. And so is the
twitch, walking/jogging/proceeding in its wake, a crocodile of optic
laden anoraks. These are my people.

The bird alights in the top of a young oak tree. It _does_ like an
audience after all; such a pose can only be deliberate. The fans go
wild; the air is filled with the roar of shutter clicks, oohs, aahs,
"are we sure that's it? Yes, yes". It's all I can do to not collapse
in a fit of giggles. After completing this part of its display, the
bird promptly sods off back towards the enclosure and disappears. The
twitch dissapates, reverting to its state as I found it - several
collections of lost looking individuals glaring at trees.

I return home to view my photographs on a reasonably sized
screen. There are, miraculously, signs of the diagnostics the bird
book suggests - a lovely red brown (rustic, even) patch on the nape,
the hint of pink in the beak. Definitely enough for a tick; and what
an experience to be in such a big group!

November. The month where it really gets properly dark and cold, and,
if you did all your winter birding at the beginning of the year,
there's not a lot to be offered in the way of ticks. Four weeks of
drought and I'm off on a fools errand to try to discern a Water Pipit
from a Rock Pipit at Barnes WWT. Desperate times.

I get to Barnes with remarkable speed; there before 10am - that's a
tremendous achievement for a Sunday morning. I walk in with a skip in
my step, happy in the knowledge that the hordes of more touristic
visitors will still be struggling to put their wellies on.

Now, how to take advantage? Well, it's November, and its cold. This
can only mean Bittern. My pipit mission is likely to be found in the
tower hide; I shall take a leisurely path their via the Dulverton and
WWF hides. Dulverton delivers - there's a bittern poking about in the
reed bed almost directly opposite. Brilliant. I unpack the scope to
take a better look at it. As I do so, a giant white bird lands behind
one of the islands between me and the reed bed. Great White Egret!
I've not seen one at Barnes before, how exciting. Worthy of a
Birdguides submission, at least.

This, of course, scotches any opportunity for an extended stay for our
oversized white friend. I get to share the treat with a couple of
other birders who turn up looking for Bittern: "There's one there, and
look, also, Great White Egret" but that's about it. The egret seems
unimpressed with its island, and shortly flies off over the
hide. Another birder enters the hide "Was that Great White Egret?"
"Yes" "Balls. Oh well, at least I saw it go".

I make an exit, pay the swiftest of visits to WWF hide (the least
productive of the whole reserve), then head up to the top floor of the
tower. This is probably one of my favourite places in London; a
sociable birding hub, rarely empty, almost never dull. I am occupant
three or four; perfect.

There isn't a lot about, mind. The usual one-or-two wadery subjects
are present on the scrape, which provides a brief bit of interest. I
could try and play the Jack Snipe game, but it's not really what I'm
here for. I do need to watch the areas around the water's edge, but
thankfully the pipits are going to be in the more grassy open bits
(rather than crouching in the undergrowth) by default.

There are some pipits. I have no idea whether they are Rock (its
_very_ difficult not to mime an air guitar when considering this bird)
or Water. Hrmm. I consult the bird book. Water pipit is browner rather
than greyer. Not quite as bright as meadow, though. I stare at the
pipit. I stare at the bird book. No, I really don't know. I'm going to
need assistance.

Thankfully, assistance has now had its breakfast, grabbed a mid
morning coffee from the cafe and, empowered by these actions, started
to arrive in force. I relinquish a prime seat (good view of the scrape
and the grazing marsh, room for scope) and try to involve myself in
the gossip. "Someone reported a Great Egret"/"Yes, that was me!"/"Oh,
where was it? Is it still about?"/"I'm afraid it buggered off a good
forty minutes ago, sorry"/"Ah well". My credentials confirmed, I shut
up and listen as the pros do their own survey.

Talk eventually comes around to Water Pipit; apparently located
somewhere on the grassy causeway that designates the left hand edge of
the wader scrape. More precisely than that is problematic. Thankfully,
the hide is basically full, and I can rely on at least one person that
is less shy but equally nonplussed to pipe up "where's this pipit
then?" to elicit further directions.

"Right on the edge, making its way from front to back". Indeed, there
is a pipity thing bouncing along the water line. Can I convince myself
it is a Water Pipit, though? Well, yes, it is brown. Is it too brown
though? Oh dear. This is why Emma hates pipits. I take another look in
the book in search of inspiration. Nothing doing. Oh well, nothing for
it.

"Would someone mind educating me as to why that's a Water Pipit rather
than a Rock Pipit?" I venture. "Well, Rock Pipit would be much greyer,
and it's not a warm enough brown for Meadow". Great. "Also - can you
see the two lighter bars on the wing? That's not a bad
indication". Better! Although not really supported by the book. Or,
indeed, unanimously supported by the hide. Colouration is much more
the preferred diagnostic of the crowd. I'll take their word for it
that it's Water Pipit. I think it's brown enough. Maybe. Its getting
too rowdy in here for me in any case, so we'll claim that as a tick
and make an exit.

The remainder of the visit is less vexing, but not entirely
unremarkable. In the Headley hide, a smaller group are transfixed by
Barnes's Best View Of Bittern - no more than 5m from the hide, one is
poking about just inside the reedbed. Even at this range you have to
focus to see it, but once you do; what an absolute treat. This isn't
the first time I've seen a Bittern in this hide at this range, but the
previous time was so long ago I'd started to consider dropping Headley
from my default Barnes walk route. All, now, is forgiven.

A quick visit to Wildside is all that remains to be done; this yields
no further excitement, and a retreat back to the bus stop follows.

A hastily arranged week in Scotland suddenly looms in the
calendar. After much negotiation, we're going to spend much of it on
Skye.

I'm not overly thrilled with this choice; bird wise, I'd rather be
operating out of somewhere nearer Inverness; there's a wider range of
well known good spots. Skye, I suspect, will be bleak, big, and mostly
blank of birds. Still, there's a couple of decent walks, and it'll be
by the sea.

After a luxurious trip on the sleeper up to Inverness, it's a long
(but tremendously scenic) drive over the mainland to Skye. We stop at
[Carron
restaurant](https://www.tripadvisor.co.uk/Restaurant_Review-g1463472-d1536386-Reviews-Carron_Restaurant-Strathcarron_Scottish_Highlands_Scotland.html)
- which, if you even drive this route, you should too, the food and
service is excellent (the puzzling placemats are the cherry on
top). Apologies for the TripAdvisor link, at pixel time, the [official
website](http://www.carronrestaurant.com) won't DNS resolve.

We're staying in Broadford, by the bay. This turns out to be a very
good decision; our cottage has an excellent view out over the sea, and
decent enough windows that I can scope from an armchair. Luxury!

I am soon wishing I had a slightly chunkier telescope. The sea is
big. Some of it is very far away; and of course there are several
birds bobbing about on the boundary between "comfortably identifiable"
and "anonymous blobs". There are obviously several divers, some grebes
and a few sea ducks out there, but I'm going to have to be patient and
wait for them to be closer to id them.

I don't have to wait too long. The morning after we arrive is bright
and still. Without too much difficulty, I pick out Slavonian Grebe,
Black-throated Diver and Common Scoter (which is mildly unusual for
the area). The shore holds obvious Curlew, Redshank and Oystercatcher,
and the garden Reed Bunting. None of those are ticks, but they're
excellent birds to have on your doorstep!

We spend much of the day exploring the island by car; not a great deal
more is observed - some other divers, plenty of cormorants, a few
waders here and there. No eagles!

Morning two has the same suspects, less the Scoter, but with a pair of
additional mysteries. Heh. This is a very good guide to why
seawatching is difficult; both birds spend only a limited time on the
surface, and can obviously move significantly under the water. To
compound this, the waves occlude the bird even when the bird is on the
surface, the light is mediocre, and they're bloody miles away. Oh, and
they're both on their own, with no nearby friends to help give them
some scale.

The first mystery is the easier one - an entirely monochrome bird,
that, after a few minutes of watching, has a thin, sharp beak, rather
than a duck's bill. There are hints of the white wing patch that will
identify this bird so easily in the Summer. Yes, it's black guillemot.

The second is a tougher challenge, not least because I think it's a
tick, and I want to be very sure. I end up taking the scope outside to
follow the bird around the bay to the left. This bird has the same
mottled palette as the Guillemot, with some additional brown, and much
patchier colouration, particularly on the head, which is more rounded,
and equipped with what is definitely a duck's bill.

By process of elimination (and extended periods of consultation with
the bird book), I think this can only be a female (or possibly
juvenile) Long-tailed Duck; the combination of features rules out
everything else. Right, it's going on the list.

The rest of the day isn't particularly birdy; some Ravens mobbing a
Buzzard are notable, we also see two or three groups of divers
(species not clear from the car) in the lochs that cut the island into
what I can't stop describing as lobes.

Morning three, and there's a diver a bit closer in that looks
promising. There've been what I think have been Black-throated Divers
in the bay every morning so far, but this one is Great Northern, for
me; it has a more brutish profile, a giant wedge of a beak, and that
more beady looking eye that gives it a more primitive air than its
cousins. Yeah, that lumpy cliff of a forehead is a giveaway, GND it
is.

We hop in the car for a whistlestop tour of places we'd like to walk
around - it looks like this will be our last day of non-awful
weather. We make it up to Quiraing (joyfully pronounced "Kerrang" to
the sign of the horns \m/) and get righteously blown around for an
hour or so amongst some epic geology, flourescent coated sheep and
some Ravens. We're pretty confident we didn't manage the walk we set
out to (hard to see the map with eyes full of tears, thanks again
wind) but we get back to the car and discover we don't really mind.

Flying visits are made to An Corran (where we are dubious about the
dinosaur footprints, but there is a nice Grey Heron). Mealt falls is
underwhelming, but a good opportunity for a biscuit and a few terrible
photographs. A quick walk up to the Old Man of Storr, on the other
hand, is an excellent distraction.

We gamble a bit on our ability to get up and down in under ninety
minutes (we get most of the way up in half an hour, the skies look
clear - what could possibly go wrong?) and it's worth it, the views
are spectacular. We make plenty of stops to look back down the hill
towards the mainland (and to discuss which particular sticky up rock
is actually the "Old Man"; we remain uncertain). Having the geography
protect you from the wind can really make a walk, it turns out.

Once at the top (well, the foot of the cliffs that we decide is a
bridge too far), we start to circuit round a tall rock
formation. Perhaps two thirds of the way round, a giant raptor, mobbed
by a pair of Ravens, swoops over us from the cliffs above. Golden
Eagle? Probably; too big for Buzzard, not rectangular enough for
White-tailed. Not a good enough view to be confident though, and by
the time I've sprinted/stumbled out into the open again all three
birds have disappeared. Sod. I don't think we can count that.

We spend a couple of minutes more taking in the view before agreeing
that it might be starting to get a bit dark for this. A hasty descent
is made, two covert wees are achieved and we're back on the road
home. As we leave Portree, the heavens open, and a journey back to
Broadford that usually takes an hour or so takes closer to two!

The rain doesn't really stop for the rest of our time on Skye. We make
an attempt to visit Neist Point lighthouse, but the wind and rain is
so strong that we don't get beyond the car park; the path to the
lighthouse itself is even more exposed, and we aren't entirely
convinced that getting saturated with cold Atlantic water is a price
worth paying for the same 50m of visibility a little bit further out
into the sea. We do spot a beautiful flock of Goosander on Loch
Harport on the way there, mind; the sun even comes out for a second or
two to help them show off their pink-tinged white tummies.

On our final day we make another attempt at finding an eagle; it's
time for a drive down Glenbrittle. Beyond some Oystercatchers at the
end of the Glen, however, it's a bit dead. We suspect all of the
non-water based birds are sensibly sheltering somewhere - all our
hilltop staring comes to naught - not even a Raven deigns to
appear. And we're stopping to look at those tops even more than usual
- the road in and out of the glen is windy enough to trigger my motion
sickness even when I'm driving - that's strong work. Oh well; only one
eagle out of two in 2018, it seems!

The next day, we switch coasts; we've got a night in Lossiemouth
before a flight back from Aberdeen. The drive back is just as good the
one out - we notice that a few hills have a dusting of snow on them
that didn't before. We make our traditional stop at the large Tesco on
the way out of Inverness (which I think is our strongest repeat
destination, coming in at over one visit per Scotland trip across
multiple years; well done to the proprietors) and head out for Nairn,
or, more specifically, for Culbin Sands.

Nairn is a most pleasant town. We have underestimated its loveliness
before, having only driven through it under a bit of a cloud last
time. It turns out that with a bit of sun and a bit more of an
explore, our impression quickly improves. We park up next to the
marina, and it's turned into a terrific afternoon, blue skies, calm
seam, gorgeous views over the sands. 

The birding, within a few seconds of getting out of the car, is also
excellent - loads of seaducks, a nice raft of scoters, some waders
along the water's edge. The best is probably a flock of fifteen or so
Long-tailed Duck, in much better light and at much better distance
than the single Broadford Bay bird. The difference in size and posture
between the male and the female is surprising - or perhaps it's just
the starkness of the plumage that gives that impression. A fabulous
duck in any case.

We embark on a walk along the beach, as advised by Gordon. This is a
bit more like it; lost of low level activity, some nice greenery (a
forest off to the right), a bit of sun, the concept of being able to
get back to the car and not have to drive for another two hours to get
home. Bliss. We even manage to turn it into a circular walk, crossing
a bit of bog in order to come back along the forest's edge. The trees
tempt us in with occasional birdsong clamour, but it's getting dark,
and we're sceptical enough after a year that we know what we can hear
is Siskin, Treecreeper and Goldcrest, and not the Crossbills or
Firecrest that would add to our list.

Back to the car, and it's a short drive to Lossiemouth, where some
seriously cosy accommodation awaits. We're somewhat disappointed to
only be staying for a night!

We wake the next morning to continued calm weather. We go for a quick
tour of Lossiemouth; it's got a decent Co-op and a lovely seafront. It
also has good enough waves to tempt out surfers in early December (in
double wetsuits, we guess). As you'd expect, the River Lossie meets
the North Sea here, but it has a good kilometre or two of running
parallel to it, and it's full to the brim with wildfowl.

We have places to go, however; to the South, a hard-to-find reserve at
Loch Spynie offers a possibility of Red-necked Grebe, and maybe a
Glaucous Gull. Gordon's directions and a few actual road signs get us
to the reserve - the car park thankfully has an interpretive panel, or
you might think you had just arrived at a farm. It's a short walk from
there to the single hide, which is flanked on both sides by feeders,
and offers excellent views of a good three quarters of the lake.

The lake is full of lake ducks, i.e Tufted Duck. There are hundreds. A
few Goldeneye lurk here and there. A gentle trumpeting tells us there
are some Whooper Swans here too - a pair of them and at least one
juvenile. Of RNG there is no sign, however. There are many
Great-crested Grebes, which are a confusion species for basically
everything at this time of year. Each grebe is examined for signs of
once having a red neck, but all prove innocent. We probably miss some,
but they're differently shaped birds, and the scope gives us a good
enough view that we think we'd be able to spot RNG.

A local birder arrives, bringing with him the knowledge that our
pronunciation of both Lossiemouth and Spynie is hilariously
inaccurate. He can't find RNG either - apparently it has been towards
the areas of the Loch the hide doesn't overlook so well when it was
last seen. Typical. Some of the grebe shaped blobs towards the far
left and right of the hide's field of view are brought back in for
questioning, but still, no joy. We bid our companion farewell and go
for a quick walk in the woods, but on discovering we're going to be
unable to circuit the Loch easily, we head back to the car sooner
rather than later.

Our next stop is Fochabers. A large gang of Waxwings have been sighted
here, and the description of their location is _very_ precise. We stop
on the designated road and stride out of the car, expected to be
greeted by the gentle trills of Waxwings. We are disappointed. We're
also, ridiculously, at 2pm, already starting to run out of daylight -
it's become overcast; the light is bad enough that we spend ages
discerning that the treetop birds nearby are all Redwings (we should
really have guessed from the behaviour - flitting to the next tree
further away as we approach is classic Winter thrush behaviour).

We take a stroll along the Burn of Fochabers, thinking that if we were
Waxwings, that's the sort of place we might hang out. This is, of
course, foolish - Waxwings love a supermarket car park more than they
do a wood - they'll go wherever they can find berries. We're somewhat
short of them here, the last we saw were in gardens nearer the
car. First though, a covert wee is urgently sought (and found), and
some much needed patience is restored. The path along the burn then
links us back up with the road on which we parked. We've probably
spent forty minutes walking one and a half kilometres. Ridiculous,
really.

Fifty Waxwings have vanished, then. No-one else has found them
elsewhere. We make a guess that perhaps they're still in Fochabers,
but not _exactly_ where they've been for the last two or three days;
earlier sightings have them elsewhere around the boundary of a school
lurking behind the treeline opposite where we've parked. A slow drive
around Fochabers follows - Waxwings don't tend to be shy, and there
are fifty of them; if we confine ourselves to the border of the
school, how hard can it be?

Well, if they aren't there, impossible. Our initial exploration around
the West side is fruitless - we see a single Blackbird and nothing
else, even the Redwings desert us. We circuit back round via our
original parking spot and try the East side. This is perhaps the
safest residential driving that has ever occurred in Fochabers - we
are doing all of 8mph. It pays off - we find a solitary Waxwing
perched in a tree on Woodside place. We try briefly to observe from
the car, but this isn't really a place we should park, so Emma sneaks
out of the non-Waxwing side door and I glide the car away at a gentle
2 or 3mph. The Waxwing is unmoved. Phew.

I park up round the corner, and get back to the Waxwing to enjoy all
of twenty seconds view before it ups sticks, flying high over the
house whose garden it had perched in. Not the greatest Waxwing
encounter ever. I'm still rather spoilt by them turning up on some
bushes near work a few years back, where an area that previously had
only ever held starlings had ten or so Waxwings in for a couple of
days. We review the photos of this bird (universally awful) before
starting to make tracks to our final location of the week - the mouth
of the River Spey.

This turns out to be underwhelming - the Scottish Dolphin Centre isn't
open, and the light levels are so bad that even the brightness of a
few nearby Goosander aren't enough to tempt us out of the car (and
into the cold) for very long. We eat some sandwiches in a huff and
decide that this trip's birding is done, and the slightly arduous
journey home should now be started.

A week later, the quest for Red-necked Grebe is back on; there have
been several sightings of a pair on the Alpha Pool at Cliffe
Pools. This is a bold choice. My knowledge of how not to bike to
Cliffe has expanded (i.e do _not_ cycle along the Saxon Shore Way, it
is made of mud), but there's no guarantee that the alternative
approach (stick to the slightly less direct cycle route) is any
better. And it is considerably colder than the last attempt.

Thankfully, the cycle route is _much_ better, and I reach the reserve
in good shape just after half past one. I play with the idea of having
a proper explore of the reserve, but it's clear after half an hour
that: a.) there's not much about, b.) I've not got enough time to do
the reserve and look for RNG and not least c.) I'm cold, and have only
limited patience. I lock the bike to a nearby handy gate (internally,
I worry someone might shut and lock the gate before I come back. I
assess the risk of this is low, and that even if this does occur, I
can climb over/lift the bike back if I need to).

I confidently adjudge that the way round to the Alpha pool is via a
well-signed public footpath and set off along it.

I am quite surely wrong. This is a cow-path, at best. What was that
sign actually pointing at? Various spiky plants become determined to
make their mark on my legs, arms and face. I am glad to be a glasses
wearer! Soon, more confirmation is given that this is not a path, as
the only way across a watercourse is to shin along some pipes that
span the gap. We've come too far now to go back though, so pipes it
is.

A small group of ponies awaits in the short scrubby area beyond. They
scarper to my left as I approach. As I reach where they were, I enter
the land of Fieldfares. Or rather, as I approach, they begin to exit,
in droves; with each step I take ten or fifteen birds fly off, and I
feel progressively worse at having followed this non-path.

Final confirmation of non-pathness is achieved as I reach the sandy
edges of the quarry that sits at the Northern corner of Alpha pool;
there is clearly no earmarked route for a person on foot to follow. I
pick my way around the border of the sand, and this leads me on to the
actual path, which, I now remember, more carefully traces the banks of
the Thames and Cliffe Creek. Oh well, we're here now.

A quick traverse around the quarry and Cliffe fort (the tide is high,
making the bank upon which the path runs feel quite excitingly
perilous; the river is one mis-step to my right away) and the Alpha
pool's full extent is revealed.

This is a _giant_ body of water, and it is _covered_ in
grebes. Scanning it for RNG is going to be tough - it's windy enough
for there to be waves (and, on top of the bank, to make any view
rather shaky), and the opposite bankis, in many places, beyond the
reach of my scope. A quick scan of the water nearest the fort and the
quarry yields _loads_ of Little Grebe, but nothing else. 

At the earliest possible opportunity I descend down from the bank to
the somewhat more sheltered shore of the pool to have a more relaxed
look. I'm sort of at the apex of a corner that juts into the pool like
an arrow pointing due East when I spy a fellow birder skulking around
from the opposite direction. He too is making frequent stops to survey
the lake from multiple angles, and I assume he's having about the same
amount of luck as I am, given the fact that he isn't stopping for very
long.

I play the waiting game - there's a lot of lake for me to survey from
here, and a lot of possible floating/diving things that could be RNG
to look over. The light from here is borderline helpful, too. A few
birds give me brief pause, but they're all either Little or
Great-crested Grebes after extended observation.

My distant birding companion is now a few metres away and is showing
every sign of wanting to be sociable. He's is luck - after an hour and
a half of being blow about and not seeing anything, a brief break to
talk to another human would be most welcome. He's been circuiting the
reserve to do the December Wetland Bird Survey (or WeBS count as it's
known); with some diligence it seems - a well worn notebook is
produced that is full to brim with records. We chat about our various
routes to our current position - as far as I knew, the path he's just
taken is strictly verboten, but no, apparently just strongly
discouraged by the quarry folks, who have health and safety
concerns. We laugh off my bramble and Fieldfare disturbing route here
and then I gently prod for information regarding grebes.

The news isn't good - the Red-necked have been seen, but right over
the other side of the lake, and he hasn't clapped eyes on them on his
way round. He has seen at least a pair of Black-necked,
though. Hrmm. We chat a bit more about WeBS, the slow whittling down
of people who volunteer (through, uh, old age), how good it is to find
someone young (me!) doing some birding, and how I would happily do a
WeBS count or two, if my nearest wasn't more than two hours away (and
I wasn't full time employed)! One day. This has turned into a birding
conversation good enough to have made the trip worthwhile - its always
great to come across someone with such an enthusiasm for it.

The light is fading though, and I haven't quite extinguished the last
hope of finding an RNG. So I bid this chap (he did tell me his name,
but I instantly forgot it) farewell and follow in his footsteps along
the edge of the lake. Many stops are made to stare into the heart of
the water, but there's nothing doing - I'm either unable to find the
birds, or they've spent this whole time hiding right at the back of
the lake, where they are still effectively anonymous. I clamber back
up onto the official footpath, exit through the main quarry works
(still on the actual footpath) and scoot back into the reserve to pick
my bike up (no gate shenanigans required). 

As I cycle out of the reserve, I internally admit that Red-necked
Grebe is just not going to make the 2019 list. This is mildly
annoying! The last (and only) time I saw one was when I was last year
listing, when I came across a beautiful summer plumaged bird at
Frodsham Marshes. That was, I remember, a pretty epic ad-hoc stop,
bringing a couple of lifers (the RNG and a Lesser Scaup (also not on
this year's list)) in under half an hour, at a place that just
happened to be on the way to somewhere we were already going. Oh
well. At least I had a nice chat with the WeBS counter, and I'll know
how to get here more effectively on the bike next time.

I veritably fly back to Gravesend on the cycle path (not least because
it is unlit, and my bike lights are not strong enough for me to
confidently take me time and be able to see all the way there), where
I have enough time to grab a commiseratory Mcdonalds before boarding
the train back to St. Pancras.

The end of the year is rushing towards us and I have more vacation
than I can carry over. A couple of days off to see the madre (and
drive her to see a few year ticks of her own), then.

Mum has exhausted Attenborough's birds for the year, so we need to go
a little further afield. Our first stop is East of Nottingham, on the
North bank of the Trent. Hoveringham is its name.

I haven't been here before; my Trent valley exploration has always
been up the river from Toton, not down. It's even more of an obvious
flood plain here than there - my brain's "flood risk" alarm is going
off constantly; I wonder how this area isn't semi-submerged every
other year (I think there's some equipment to stop it somewhere).

Our stop is at a sailing club of the sort that don't want any
non-members using the road down to the club, according to some very
snotty signs. This is like a red rag to a bull for me, and after a
brief stop, we drive down it anyway, parking just before the gate
where you have to speak to someone to progress. I suspect, in standard
U.K fashion, you can just rock up as a guest if you're polite,
particularly given how many folks seemed to be doing so, but why the
sign if so? Vexing.

We're here to find Black-necked Grebe; one's been reported
consistently throughout the week, and there's only one lake, so how
hard can it be.

Well, after two failed attempts at Red-necked Grebe, we know the
answer to that. Particularly when the lake is bloody enormous and
there's a freezing cold wind. We take turns between the scope and
drying our faces of the floods of water streaming out of our eyes.

On this occasion, however, we are eventually successful. Mum finds the
bird near a set of buoys off towards the back. I worry that my
diagnostic for BNG is swiftly becoming "fluffier than the other
grebes", but after continued staring I can look back at the bird book
and go, "yeah, that's it". Staines Reservoirs, all is forgiven.

A quick stop for lunch is followed by a drive North to Clumber
Park. Coming here used to be a double edged sword as a kid - amazing
park (great bike trails, I vaguely remember. Or maybe that was
Rufford), but terrible journey to get there: guaranteed travel
sickness. Today, I'm driving and it's surprisingly smooth. I guess it
takes longer if you have to cross Nottingham.

We're here for a Smew that thinks it's a Goosander. Or perhaps it just
likes the company of Goosanders. Clumber Park has a giant long lake to
search, but thankfully the end we park at seems to be harbouring the
vast majority of the birds.

It's turned into quite a pleasant Winter's afternoon - a decent amount
of sunshine, and cold but not freezing. We set out on the path that
circuits the lake.

We quickly find our first Goosanders. The lake empties into a rivulet
at its Eastern extreme, which has a cute bridge over it. From the
bridge we can see ten or fifteen Goosanders messing about below. They
are brilliantly lit by the winter sun, but alas, there is no Smew
amongst them; what a fabulous view that would have been. It would also
be very un-Smew like, though; all the birds I've seen have been
skulkers, paddling around as far away from human eyes as possible.

We can see plenty of detergent-advert level white in the main lake
too, but we're hoping that, from a bit further round, the sun won't be
entirely in our eyes, and we might have a bit more hope.

There really are a _lot_ of Goosander here - two or three groups of up
to twenty. They're fast becoming duck of the year for me, an oft
unlooked for bit of treasure. A few Goldeneye are around as well,
adding to the distractions. What are we here for again? Oh yes, Smew
(female, "redhead"). I trust to the descriptions from Notts Birders
Twitter, and stick mostly to birds near Goosander flocks. If only
there weren't so many!

Just as we're about to give up, a bird surfaces from a dive in the
furthest group of Goosanders. Ah, now, even without being in the
scope, that's setting off all my "different to everything else here"
alarms. A rapid scope reconfiguration confirms; that's our bird! I
switch places with Mum, and she gets a good thirty seconds of Smew
before it psychically detects it is being viewed and flies off in a
huff. Jubilation!

We take a quick detour on the way home, as some Waxwings have been
spotted. We're too late though - there's nowhere to park, we're
starting to get caught in rush hour traffic, and it's too dark. Home
time!

Tomorrow arrives and a plan to go to Rutland Water arrives with
it. There are a couple of birds there that are ticks for both of us,
and one of them even has reasonably succinct directions (searching the
whole lake is a Sisyphean task).

We park at the well known end of the reserve and are greeted by some
immensely enthusiastic volunteers. They've definitely had their
Weetabix. That, or they don't usually get many visitors on a Friday.

We have a quick look for the visitor centre hide, and there are
already good ducks; Goosander again making a strong appearance. A
Great White Egret is also present; a very nice treat, although this
might now be the fourth time I've seen one in the year, far more than
I'd expected. Of our two quarries though, there is no sign (as we'd
expect - one is out on the main body of the lake, rather than one of
the official reserve's "pools", and the other is on a totally
different "limb" of the reserve). We'll have to go on a bit more of an
excursion to have a chance of seeing them.

We make our exit from the visitor centre and move out along the paths
that take us out into the promontory that separates the two Southern
limbs of the lake. We're trying to get to a hide that looks North or
East, towards the town of Rutland, because there, apparently, a
Red-necked Grebe has been reported.

Yes, we're trying _yet again_ for RNG. Third time lucky, I'm
hoping. The chances don't immediately look great though. Even when we
get to an appropriate hide, huge tracts of water are still (even with
a scope) an eye wateringly long way away, the light is average, and
there's enough wind to make waves a further obscurance. Oh, and there
are hundreds (possibly thousands) of other birds that need to be
searched; for example, to our left, a raft of at least a couple of
hundred Coot is floating about; if our bird is amongst them,
intermittently diving, well, we probably don't have time to find it,
never mind inclination.

We undertake the best search we can, focussing on areas near landmarks
on the North shore that previous reporters have mentioned. When this
yields nothing (well, it actually yields boatloads of Cormorant,
Great-crested Grebe, and yes, you guessed it, more Coots), we try
looking further East into the more open water. Nothing doing there
either. Humph.

More staring. Mum and I are a bad pair of people to give this mission
to, because we're usually both having to think about the welfare of
someone less bird enthusiastic than us (who is usually waiting
politely nearby, and only occasionally suggesting that nearby
hostelries may be more comfortable and supply better
vittles). Together we are too stubborn!

After a few more false positives, we give up; we need lunch. Another
Red-necked Grebe goes missing (and like all the others, it dutifully
reappears when sought by other birders the next day, according to
Birdguides).

We proceed to a pub that's owned by someone famous (this is true of
everything in Rutland as far as I can work out) and eat lunch. It is
good. Being inside and warm is also pretty good, it's noticeably
greyer and colder than it was yesterday.

We gee ourselves up for a quick tour of the Southernmost limb via the
less popular visitor centre. We haven't long (Winter, so basically
dark by 4pm), but that's fine, both of us have had _almost_ enough of
being out in the cold looking for non-existent birds.

We're on this side in search of American Wigeon (sung to the tune of
Lenny Kravitz's "American Woman"). This, if anything, is an even
harder challenge than the grebe. This side of the reserve is populated
almost exclusively by Eurasian Wigeon, and telling the difference, at
range, in (yes, still, it's basically been dark since October as far
as I can tell) crap light, when you've never seen one in the
wild...well, perhaps we should just have gone straight home from the
pub.

We do look at a lot of Wigeon. Goodness me. It must be said of
Rutland, that in Winter, it is a spectacular place just for the sheer
number of wildfowl on offer. Although, if pushed, I think I prefer the
Swale, slowly snaking it's way between Sheppey and the North Kent
mainland.

We admit defeat after the third hide. Not nearly as productive day in
terms of ticks as yesterday, but a fun day out, and more evidence that
Red-necked Grebe is a elusive little git.

A low key Christmas is successfully negotiated, and passes without
incident. Well, a small incident: I slightly overdo some chips. Oh
well.

There might be an opportunity to add a final tick or two to the year's
total during the post-Christmas family-a-thon. Any visit to Dad gets
us in range of Burwell, Wicken and Welney. Attenborough or Church
Wilne might turn up something unusual (a shrike, perhaps) too.

We start in Cambridgeshire. A walk around another nameless fen
(actually, a heath, Cavenham Heath, to be precise) kicks us
off. Nothing but pigs, and one marsh harrier. In the warmer months you
might find Stone Curlew here, but now? Dead as a doornail. Probably
not helped by bringing the entire clan (nearly twenty people) with us.

We try a trip to Burwell the next day. We successfully navigate
(Burwell Fen is mostly just a car park rather than an actual reserve,
it seems). The signs, however, are more promising. There's a group of
Red-legged Partridge waiting in a field by the road to the carpark. A
giant flock of 150+ goldfinches is assembling in three tall trees
_next_ to the car park. This necessitate a lot of time spent ruling
that small flitty birds anywhere near the flock are also
goldfinches. Grassier fields nearby are grazed by winter thrushes. In
general, many many more signs of life.

We're here for slightly larger fare though. Once we're parked, we
cross over a cut (contents: several coots, and two overexcited dogs,
intermittently). We stop on the bridge's far end - it provides one of
the best viewing angles of the fen.

The fen takes up our entire field of view. Burwell village is just
about visible on the far left. A line of trees provides the terminator
on the right. Both boundaries are probably a good kilometre away;
you'd probably be able to pick out a bird of prey hovering over
either, but anything smaller would be invisible. Behind us, the view
to the horizon is obscured by a much nearer tree line; beyond that
lies Wicken Fen. In summary: much more manageable than Stubb Mill, but
still a wide area.

It's not long before Short-eared Owl #1 appears. It quarters the fen,
carving up the air. Soon, another joins it. And then two more. They
could share, we suppose - a quarter each? Etymologically pleasing, at
least. This doesn't convince the birds, who get into multiple two and
three way spats over specific parts of the fen, squeaking at each
other as they go.

We receive two sets of talkative visitors as we watch. The first is
clearly an old hand; he's seen up to twenty (!) SEOs here when it's
been good. That must be one heck of a Short-eared Owl fight, given
their predilection for feistiness when there's just four here.

The second are less proficient, a couple who are doing an excellent
job of not listening to each other (this is obvious to us only as we
are ourselves past masters of the technique). They at least agree that
a Kestrel is a Kestrel, and not a shorty; not totally hopeless
then. We quietly shamble over and point them in the direction of the
owls we can still see (one is handily having a sit on a mostly visible
fencepost), and the cheer it brings them is a delight to see.

We consider hanging about to wait for Harrier roosting time, but we've
further festivities to attend, no ticks are likely, and the shortest
circular route we can decipher is at least an hour long. Back to the
car; as ever, a good viewing of SEO is all you really need to make a
decent day out.

We do have some tick opportunities on our transition day. White Stork
and Tundra Bean Goose have been reported at Welney. Online sleuthing
has discovered a Long-eared Owl roost that may be worth a visit also.

Neither of these excursions is _exactly_ on the way, but each
diversion is at most half an hour added to the route we'd be taking
anyway. Our first stop is Welney WWT. Actually, it isn't; we spy two
serious looking birders looking seriously from the bridge at Welney
village, so we park up there to see if they're on to either of our two
targets.

Either we've breached some unknown birder etiquette rule, or these two
are antisocial. Our appearance on the bridge is roundly ignored, even
after a cheery hello. Hard to know how to proceed when "hello" is
blanked. We try instead to work out what they're after by looking
where they're looking. Nope, nothing. Even when they're describing a
bird in flight, we can't grok precisely where to look, or even what
they're looking for. Soon, both agree that its time to move on; that
last flight has probably taken it onto the reserve proper. Aha - a way
in! "Ah, did you just have White Stork, then?". The nearer
scope-wielder manages to ingest this _and_ reply: "yep; very distant
though. We think it might be visible from the reserve now". "OK,
thanks - we're heading there now. Good luck", and off we go again.

Welney car park. One E. Walker is inappropriately footweared, and uses
it to switch into something a bit more mud-capable. This gives me time
to find yet another Great White Egret. What is that, the fifth of the
year? The sixth? I've lost count. Clearly a bird on the increase in
the UK. This gives us a bit of birding currency; we exchange it for
knowledge that the stork has been recently viewed from the
Southernmost hides of the reserve, and that absolutely no-one has seen
any interesting geese. Oh, no, there were some Pink-footed at the
North end earlier. Bean goose is clearly another bogey species for the
year. "They don't exist. I don't care about them" claims Emma.

We take a brief rest in the large (also, heated) hide and give the
horde of wildfowl there a good look at. There's always the possibility
of Green-winged Teal, say the pro birders of Welney. Well, yes. It
depends on how long you're prepared to look - there are thousands upon
thousands of standard Teal to be checked if you accept this mission.

We grudgingly head north to check if we can find the White-fronted
Geese. Perhaps they were misidentified. Or just completely imagined;
they are absent according to our search, and that of a few others. We
perform a u-turn and head South in hope of finding the stork. At least
that'll be obvious if we find it.

We've been warned that the path South is flooded an impassable without
wellingtons. A brief look at Emma's feet. Walking shoes. My feet: the
same. Fortunately, we've been here before, been given the same
warning, and know we're able to skirt the flood using the steep bank
next to it (the bank survived, no birds were scared, our feet were
dry: no harm, no foul). Do not attempt this at home (or with weak ankles).

The hide has two serious looking birders within. Thankfully though,
they are of the sociable sub-species, and cheerfully greet us as we
arrive. "Are you looking for the stork?" they ask. "Indeed; have you
seen it?" "No, not yet. It has been seen towards the telegraph post
over there within the last twenty minutes though." "Alrighty than -
we'll get set up and add some more eyes".

This is a much better birding experience - we exchange our Great White
Egret knowledge to confirm our credentials "ah, excellent, I'll have a
look on the way back" and we are part of the gang. One chap has come a
good 100 miles for stork, but has the joviality of someone who has
very low expectations; a true mark of experience.

Unsurprisingly, it's the same chap that finds it. His directions are
also excellent; we've got the scope on the bird within a few
seconds. And, honestly, White Stork is so big, and so white, that once
you know where it is, even at range, you can see it without optical
assistance.

I've not seen a stork of any variety in the wild before, and this
first encounter brings with it several surprises. #1. The brutality of
the beak. If you've ever looked at herons and felt mildly frightened,
White Stork should have the same effect. The beak is a chunky red
dagger of doom. The slightly gothic black eye detail gives the bird a
look not of parental affection but of assassin's cool. #2. The flight
- it almost looks like a bird of prey. In fact, it gets mobbed by
corvids just as a bird of prey would. #3. Did I mention it was big? I
mean, it's no Jabiru, but it's on the way.

We spent a while tracking the stork as it makes its way right along
the back edge of the water we can see. This temporarily takes it out
of view as it goes behind a birchy island. Our long-travelled expert
takes his leave "now, here's hoping it doesn't turn out to be an
escape", he utters, on the way out.

We wait enough time for the bird to turn up again, put a couple of new
arrivals on to it, and then had back to the visitor centre (once again
dodging the flood with great agility) for some lunch. Next stop:
Deeping Lakes SSSI.

The drive there is a reminder of why I will not be able to live in
fenland. There is no relief! The land is pancake flat, as far as the
eye can see. The roads often follow drainage cuts (do _not_ drive off
the edge) for miles and miles before making abrupt ninety degree
turns, or requiring a tight s-bend to hop round a railway.

The arrival at the reserve immediately requires a bit of attention -
the track to the car park consists entirely of potholes, finding a
smooth path among them for the car is a bit of a challenge. We park up
(suspension still intact), take a quick picture of the reserve map,
and head out to where we believe the internet thinks we should go - a
hide looking out on a tree covered island.

We find the hide and the island. We probably have half an hour of
actual light to find an owl. We do not find an owl. A small child
briefly barges into the hide making loud noises. This provides some
entertainment, at least. A shushing parent then appears; unnecessarily
- we are birders, but there are no birds other than pigeons out on
that island, from what we can work out, and the Tufted Ducks roaming
the water don't appear to be fussed about the interruption.

After a few more false owls, it's basically dark. We give up, and head
back to the car. Deeping Lakes Long-eared Owls have defeated
us. Although the reserve itself seems most pleasant - we'll definitely
drop in the next time we head past...but potentially early in the
morning, as that's when I've tended to have better luck finding a
napping owl.

We reach our destination, and I start updating the bird spreadsheet to
include the stork. The departing remark of the long-distance birder
comes to mind, and, just as his and our luck would have it, on
birdguides, someone has chimed in that our White Stork is in fact an
escaped bird that's been around in the area for most of December. Two
days of grey weather bring nothing of note to the Nottinghamshire
area, so it turns out that our single Fochabers Waxwing is going to be
December's only tick!