---
publish_time: 2020-01-15T00:00:00.000Z
updated_time: 2020-01-15T00:00:00.000Z
title: Part 04: An Unexpected Little Bunting
---
### An unexpected little bunting

This week's "please stay there until the weekend" report is a Little
Bunting at Walthamstow Reservoirs. 

Saturday is taken by non-bird plans (!), but Sunday is not. Sunday
arrives, and it appears my luck is partially in; the bird is,
apparently, still around. Only partially in, mind; it feels like this
is the coldest London has been for some time even before the
windchill. Also, getting to Walthamstow either involves going in and
then out (Northern then Victoria) or a pesky pair of Overground
trains.

This is _definitely_ a twitch. It's a good job Emma is absent; this
would _not_ be her scene. There's a veritable horde of birders waiting
around where the bunting's been seen - a firing squad of telescopes
awaits it. Some of them had success around an hour ago, but nothing's
been seen since. Nothing is what continues to happen for quite some
time; even the Reed Buntings that were hopping about when I arrived go
to ground.

The weather worsens; the wind gets up, it starts to snow. Much effort
is expended scanning the trees and bushes where the bird was last
seen.

A prominent local birder with a pristine east end accent and a giant
golf umbrella is remonstrating (it isn't clear who with) about the
management of the reserve. Walthamstow was, up until recently, managed
by Thames Water, but last October it was opened up as a more publicly
accessible site, with trails, and a new name: "Walthamstow Wetlands".

In short, the site went from "out of bounds to everyone except,
basically, a bunch of anoraks: fishermen and birders who obtained the
necessary permits" (thanks,
[Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2017/oct/19/walthamstow-wetlands-london-birdwatching-nature-reserve-free-entry))
to well promoted outdoor space open to everyone. Our local expert is
not impressed with how the change has been managed:

"There's no place for the wildlife anymore". "You get here now, and
people are jogging along the tops of the reservoirs - think about the
disturbance that's going to make to the birds that inhabit the
edge". "No-one is enforcing the areas where dogs aren't supposed to
go". There's something mildly entertaining about this litany; he's got
a point, and the delivery is excellent. Or possibly it's so cold that
I've started to go mad.

The snow gets heavier before it gets lighter. This is borderline
ridiculous; the visibility is such that the area of scrub where the
bird is supposed to be is obscured from view. Several folks head back
towards the visitor centre to shelter; the foolhardier of us (a good
ten or so) hang about.

Some time around 1pm the weather starts to clear a bit. I scrunch my
feet up within my shoes in an attempt to invoke the spirit of Die
Hard. A few littlies start to show some movement in the grassy patch
in front of us. A group of three birds flaps up into one of the trees
at the back of the patch. They're definitely buntings, and the one
sitting at 10 'o' clock is decidedly paler, even in this half-arsed
wintry light. Our narrator pipes up "Little Bunting!" and indeed, that's
what it clearly is.

The bird hangs about for a fair old while at this point; long enough
for some of the less hardy crew to return from their warm sanctuary
(some of them with coffee in hand, the bastards) in the visitor centre
to catch up with it, the lucky sods. Having found the bird, I take a
step outside myself and consider the sanity of having come out on such
a twitch. Verdict: non-committal. One thing is for sure - I am far,
far too cold to visit the other side of the reserve, where there is
apparently a Scaup. I'm too cold to even work out how to say
Scaup. The only thing left to do is pick up a celebratory Subway on
the way home. What a way to spend half a Sunday.