---
publish_time: 2019-12-19T20:45:00.000Z
updated_time: 2019-12-19T20:45:00.000Z
title: A Trip To Goa
---

### A Winter Trip To Goa

Work's been busy for both average birders this year, and a great deal
of holiday needed spending before it was over.

Much research was done to find a warm place with respectable avifauna
in November; it's not a month for cheery birding in the UK.

After a brief fling with the idea of the Gambia (ended by the demise
of Thomas Cook), we eventually chose to go to Goa.

#### The Itinerary

We flew direct from Gatwick to Goa. We spent a couple of days
recovering from the flight in the capital, Panaji. After that, we
travelled to North Goa, to stay on Morjim beach. Finally we travelled
to South Goa, staying in Patnem.

#### Panaji

We looked at some stuff on the internet, and had great plans to do
major exploring (to Carambolim Lake, perhaps to Chorao Island) and
boat trips (along the Zuari), but these got nixed by jetlag in favour
of much easier walks around town, and a historical walking tour of Old
Goa.

This did yield a few birds. Not least, kites - Black and Brahmini are
basically ever present; it's hard not to look up and see them at any
point in Goa; we were reminded of the frigatebirds in Rio.

The riverfront in Panaji found us a very friendly Common Sandpiper, as
well as Indian Pond Heron (well, it was a Squacco Heron to us, until
we looked in the book - they are different though, mind), several
Egrets (mostly Intermediate), and, in Campal Gardens, the spectacular
Indian Paradise Flycatcher (which was, in a bit of foreshadowing for
other small tree based birds, _impossible_ to photograph).

Another walk around Altinho found us our first Drongos, and our first
Barbet, which easily won the ugliest bird of the trip. A Red-whiskered
Bulbul introduced itself to us on the way back down via a temple or
two.

#### Morjim

After a bargainous 80 rupee bus journey, we arrived in Morjim. Cashback.

Finally free of jetlag, we stomped off to the South end of the beach,
to see if there's anything about there. The internet reckons there
ought to be. It's a bit mixed; the sand plovers were an absolute
delight, but, apart from one fleeting Oriole (probably a female Golden
Oriole), Gull-billed Tern and what we guess were Brown-headed and
Slender-billed Gulls, as well a Gull-billed Tern (which was,
unsurprisingly, a bit of a sod to ID), it definitely verged on
quiet. Perhaps we weren't there early enough, or late November isn't
the best time.

We had better luck on a longer walk North to Mandrem beach; a common
sandpiper was threatened by a crab, our first bee-eaters made an
appearance (Green), and our raptor radar correctly picked out "uh,
that one isn't a kite" with enough time to clap our eyes on
White-bellied Sea Eagle (which, true to form, disappeared in _seconds_
once we took our eyes off it). On the way home, we got an even better
look, as a returning Sea Eagle landed in a giant tree, before promptly
making a few short flights...into a nest, where its mate then flew
down to join it. Great!

#### Socorro Plateau

Rahul picked us up early on the 26th, and, after some brief passport
pickup shenanigans, we headed to a track up on the plateau. It doesn't
take long for things to start happening - the trees are absolutely
alive with birds, Rahul is spoilt for choice for things to show us;
the highlights are probably Golden-fronted Leafbird (there is such a
thing as a leafbird, to our dismay), Racket-tailed Drongo (such
noise!), Small Minivet and a female Black-headed Cuckoo Shrike.

Next, we drive down off the plateau into a small wetland area, getting
our first good look at White-throated Kingfisher. James gets
overexcited and misidentifies a giant cloud of Black-headed Ibis as
storks. Eventually some Asian Openbills turn up to spare his
blushes. A Greater Spotted Eagle is spotted hanging around in a
distant tree; nearer the car, what we _think_ is Isabelline Shrike is
perched on a spiky bush. Some larger, Blue-tailed bee-eaters are also
around, and they are, frankly, absolutely great. Indian Roller makes a
late but fleeting appearance just before we head off. Phwoar.

### Cotigao Wildlife Sanctuary

Rahul reckons that as the most Southerly and out of the way of Goa's
wildlife reserves, this is the quietest and the best.