---
publish_time: 2019-12-20T22:23:00.000Z
updated_time: 2019-12-20T22:23:00.000Z
title: Pembrokeshire: A Feast of Corvids
---

### Pembrokeshire

Land of my forefathers (my grandparents lived in the area until I was
maybe four years old)! What can a trip to Pembrokeshire offer in
October other than the assurance that the weather will be pants?
Corvids. Lots of corvids.

Pronoun guidance: this was a James only trip.

#### Getting there

Pembrokeshire. It isn't near _anywhere_. It isn't even near the rest
of Wales. I spent a good hour and a half in a spreadsheet working out
how best to do it from London on a Saturday. To save the next person
the trouble: get the train to Bristol, hire a car there, and then
drive. You might do better with a train to Swansea on a weekday (as
the car hire places will still be open when you arrive).

I stayed in St. David's (the UK's smallest city),
[here](https://www.sykescottages.co.uk/cottage/South-Wales-Pembrokeshire-St-DavidsTyddewi/The-Bakehouse-953134.html)
for a week, starting on October 26th 2019. It was an excellent base of
operations, providing easy access to the coast path, Ramsey Island,
a few other good local spots and a more than decent public house.

#### Research

I consult my trusty copy of [Where To Find Birds In The
UK](https://www.nhbs.com/2/series/where-to-watch-birds-in-britain-and-europe-christopher-helm]). This
tells me about the obvious places (the islands), and also a few less
obvious places (Dale Airfield, Dowrog Common). That book is _great_
for finding a start, but its information is based on years of
observations. I see if I can find a local bird group with a sightings
page to see what's actively birded.

I find two sites. The first, from the [Strumble Head Seawatching
Group](http://strumbleheadseawatching.blogspot.com/2018/04/last-posta-move-with-times.html),
as the last post was in 2018, and details that they've moved to a
facebook group. Which I can't see, because I have long since
deactivated my facebook account (angry "facebook is _not_ the web"
rant elided).

The second more than makes up for it. [Pembrokeshire
Birds](http://pembsbirds.blogspot.com/) has a daily bulletin from
several local sites, bringing together information from twitter, and,
I suspect, a few emails. Or possibly the login details are shared. I
don't care; as a non-local planning a trip, it was _immensely_
helpful, and a lot of the visits I made were based on the information
I found there.

#### Saturday

I arrive at St. David's still giddy that England managed to beat New
Zealand in the Rugby World Cup. Even with my precision planning
though, I've got less than an hour of daylight to work with, so I do a
quick recce of the nearby before retiring for the evening to be ready
for an early start the next day; the weather, for Wales, in October,
looks like it's going to be spectacular.

#### Sunday

I manage to get up early, and get out to Porth Clais, where I smugly
claim a free carparking ticket with the National Trust card that I
remembered to bring with me at the last minute. The car park's alive
with bird song; nothing too exciting though, mostly finches, wrens,
robins, and the occasional wintry looking Chiffchaff.

I head out along the western side of the River Alun towards the
coast. Plenty of activity follows me, but the light's a right pain, so
identification is hard. Nothing rings any particular alarm bells,
apart from a couple of _regulus_ specimens that could have been turned
into Firecrest with a bit of work. Probably just Goldcrests, though.

As I round the corner onto the coast path proper (yes, yes, I know the
path out is also the coast path, but it isn't _on_ the coast, is it?),
I am greeted by the inevitable and expected hordes of Meadow Pipit,
Stonechat and Linnet. They are wonderfully confiding at this time of
day, perching in the gorse and scrub along the fences separating the
inland farm from the 'coast'. I take some terrible photos of them
before moving on.

I turn the walk into a circuit by heading inland at an opportune
moment; the return half is less exciting (although the sheer number of
Crows and Rooks is remarkable), but there's a Grey Wagtail and a
female Bullfinch in the car park waiting for me. Unfortunately, it's
still too early for the coffee shop to be open!

That does leave me a good eight hours of daylight to have a thorough
explore, though. A good day to swap to Marloes peninsula from
St. David's, and an opportunity to visit Dale, where the grandparents
used to live. Not least because both of my bird news sources are
telling me there are Snow Buntings at Dale Airfield.

The drive to Dale is _fraught_. I remember that travelsickness was an
everpresent companion as a child, and even as a driver some of the
route to Dale is enough to make me feel queasy. A detour through
Little Haven (big sign!) doesn't help either - I can only assume the
roads were built for Hobbits.

I eventually reach Dale and discover that my childhood memory sucks -
I can't find the old house at all; and it should be easy - it used to
be pink! A quick phone call with Mum solves the problem, and I feel
less bad - the current owners have, in the last couple of years,
painted it blue! Heresy. In a huff, I drive off in the direction of
St. Ann's Head, because it's another name I remember from those years,
and one of my sources reckons it odd to be good for Chough and Raven.

Did I mention how amazing the weather is? Well, it is. I have brought
a thick jumper, and undertrousers, and I am regretting it. After
parking up and walking up to St. Ann's Head, I end up carrying coat +
jumper to stay temperate.

I neglect the opportunity to explore the land around the lighthouse,
because I can see that most of the bird life is visible from the gate
at its border. There's a Buzzard sharing a telegraph wire to my
East. Over the cliffs, boatloads of corvids are carving up the sky. My
ears, after a bit of consternation ("ooh, that sound is unusual,
figure out what's making it, now!"), tell me that some of them are
Choughs, and after a while staring upwards and spinning around like an
idiot, I finally pick out a family of five or six of them. And they
put on a bit of a show, swirling around above me for a moment or two
before disappearing to land on a bit of cliff I can't see.

The other black birds in the sky are mostly Jackdaws, but there are a
couple of bigger beasts higher up, and it isn't long before I hear a
solid "gronk". And, really, even before then, the size, the beak and
the tail were giving me hints that these were there first Ravens of
the trip. They're having a tremendous time bullying anything else in
the air, be they Jackdaws, other Ravens or Choughs. I take a seat on a
comfy (and, it turns out, somewhat damp) tussock to watch them for a
bit; Ravens are great. And, particularly at distance, occasionally a
bit difficult to split from Rook and Crow, and this is a good time to
mentally store a better representation of their jizz.

With half an eye on the time and the light, I start to make my way
North along the coast path. The Chough family decide to do a fly-past
(delightful), and three Goldfinch make an appearance on the cliff
fence, but this is otherwise uneventful. I get back to the car and
steel myself for the drive to Dale Airfield, which I guess will
involve some congested single-track road.

My fears are realised; and, worse, I take the wrong left, and have to
do a seriously sketchy three point turn to avoid driving into a
field. The road to the airfield is, as predicted, not fun, and I dive
into a tiny, tiny space behind a surfer's estate car and feel
smug. Until problems break out between a 4x4 and a furniture delivery
van right next to me, and the 4x4's passenger asks if I can do a bit
of manouevring to make things better.

Some minutes later, my hire car is still intact, and my heart rate is
returning to normal. And, even better, the traffic tells me there is a
space at the end of the road that will be easier to exit from. I
launch the car forwards again and, at the end, something resembling an
ordinary parking space awaits. I grab bins and camera from the
passenger seat and wander towards some outlines in the distance that
look like they might belong to birders.

The first chap I find has seen a single Snow Bunting, but it's been
mobile, and he last saw it a good ten minutes ago. We agree to take
two slightly different routes and attempt to signal each other if we
have success. My route takes me along one of the three main runways
that runs just about parallel to the coastline. It's surprisingly
broken up - I have to watch my step to avoid wet feet or various trip
hazards. It's also bereft of anything but Meadow Pipit.

Things start to look up when I reach the end of this runway,
though. Here, what used to be the boundary road of the airfield
intersects the runway. To my right, two further birders are very, very
cagily making their way toward me. Heh - now I know what I look like
when I'm trying to get close enough to a bird for a decent
photo. Immediately I'm glad few other people have seen me doing
this. But I'm even more glad to see the five Snow Buntings this pair
are trying to photograph.

Predictably, just as the birds get into range of my camera, the group
decides their comfort radius have been breached, and take off,
circling back around to the Northern end of this bit of the service
road. The two other birders (who have the shots they want) briefly
commiserate with me before taking their leave; I start to walk up to
where the buntings landed: If they're anything like Snow Buntings I've
seen in the past, they'll be making their way towards me already.

They're still a good distance away when the birder I originally spoke
to joins me. He, amusingly, takes my crouching as a cue to ask if I'm
taking photos of the foliage. No, no; those five Snow Buntings over
there. Five? Yes. Oh. Oh very good. And it turns out that this chap is
even more chuffed (Choughed?) to have found them than I am; I feel
fortunate to have had the opportunity to put him on to them.

Time and light pulls me on once more - I'd like to have a look at
Marloes Sands before the light's crap. I manage to circuit the
buntings without disturbing them, and take a few good shots of the
beach; the light is perfect, smug. I take one final opportunity to
bother the buntings on the way back to the car before starting the
journey back to St. David's.

#### Monday

A later start. Probably something to do with the delicious local beers
taken the night before. The weather is still excellent, and so today a
slightly longer trek along the coastal path beckons. I head out to
Caerfai from St. David's, and start to head East along the coast path
from there.

I immediately get stuck on the cliffs just out of Caerfai, because I
am being overwhelmed by Chaffinches. A group of perhaps thirty birds
tops the cliff and flies just in front of me. By the time I've worked
out they're all Chaffinches, another group of roughly the same size,
starts to do the same. This continues intermittently for some time;
perhaps ten such groups go over in around half an hour. A quick
twitter search finds that [Ramsey Island
RSPB](https://twitter.com/RSPBRamsey/status/1188750797103865856) has
been seeing something similar; but even so, I'm excited to have
dropped into a live viz-mig event!

And they Chaffinches _just_ _keep_ _coming_! Only a giant group of
Linnets near Morfa Common and the occasional Chough distract me from
the something like 1,000 birds that flap past me over the next couple of
hours. I sit down in the pub in Solva for a pint and some grub
wondering if this is just something that happens on the coastline all
the time.

In my reverie, however, I neglect to notice that I'm sitting on the
nozzle of my water bladder enough for it to be slowly but surely
giving me the appearance of a total incontinent. This is uncomfortable
enough to shorten the day's plan; a return walk via St. David's
Airfield and Dowrog Common is cancelled in favour of a bus back to a
dry pair of trousers.

Somewhat later, I head out of St. David's towards Dowrog. My trusty OS
map tells me there's a series of footpaths I can take to a road that
crosses the common. Various birding sources tell me that, from there,
there's a good view of raptors coming in to roost.

The footpaths are sodden, and my walking shoes are very quickly
water-logged. Sigh. Oh well. I console myself with the knowledge that
the water in my shoes will eventually warm, and provide comfort, like
a wetsuit. I consciously avoid thinking about this too much in case it
isn't true. The light is considerably less good than at Dale the day
before, but the birds I find (Fieldfares, Pheasants, a nice Reed
Bunting and a collection of Starlings on some wires) are sufficiently
thin on the ground to make me wonder if this was a good idea.

When I eventually reach the road that crosses the common, however,
things start to look up. There's a bloke parked up touting a scope -
he's not a local, but he's heard that people have seen Hen Harrier
here recently (Pembs Birds agrees). I continue along, not wanting to
spoil his solitude, and despite the terrain looking about right for a
harrier roost...it's not quite open enough here to see everything.

After passing through a tiny wooded area with a house hidden in it
(what a place to live!), the common opens up and I suddenly have a
near panoramic view. Almost immediately, a Marsh Harrier appears,
quarters the common South of the road, before crossing the road
(almost perfectly above me), and floating down into the trees there to
roost. Ok, good start!

I set up my scope to be able to scan the area where the Harrier set
down. And then, for a good half an hour, absolutely nothing happens. I
spend more time glancing at the birders I can see at the top of the
road for signs of excitement than actually finding
anything. Eventually I concede defeat and head up to talk to them;
perhaps they've had better luck without showing outward signs of
excitement.

They have had a slightly better time - they had a Hen Harrier earlier
on, and they were quite excited to see a Marsh Harrier. We have a good
chat about good local patches in the area, before they give up and go
home for a cup of tea (it's very, very cold, and nearly dark). With
the very last photons of light, I _think_ I can pick out a Short-eared
Owl in a grassy patch just to the North of the road, but I go boz-eyed
trying to get a solid ID; it's just too dark.

Speaking of the dark, it is now total. And I'm a good 3km from
home. Probably the least bad way back is along the A487, but that's
also in use by traffic, at 50mph, and is free of lighting. So it's a
rather frightening half an hour game of phone-light traffic dodging on
the way home. Dowrog shows potentially though: I resolve, tomorrow, to
arrive earlier, and _in a car_.

After making it home, I check pembsbirds and discover I have made the
news _twice_, first as [a visiting Birder from
London](http://pembsbirds.blogspot.com/2019/10/dowrog-update.html),
and secondly as [a mainland
birder](http://pembsbirds.blogspot.com/2019/10/ramsey_28.html). Fame
at last.

#### Tuesday

Following advice from Dowrog's locals, I attempt to visit Pwll
Trefeiddan, a pond/lake near St. Justinian. There is, however, nowhere
to park, so I give up and resolve to try somewhere else. Later, I
realise walking from St. David's would have been just fine. On the way
back into St. David's, an obscene number of Jackdaws turns the sky
black. Is a murmuration of Jackdaws a thing? It's impressive (and a
bit scary) in any case!

I decide to pay a visit to Whitesands Bay, to have a look at St David's
Head. I pay £4 for the privilege of parking. Then it's a short but
pleasant walk to the head. There's a confiding Chough on the way, and
an auk (probably Guillemot) on the water, but little else. A Peregrine
Falcon, probably on the way to Ramsey Island, makes a brief appearance
while I'm eating a snack on the rocks of the head itself.

Later on I revisit Dowrog Common, claiming the best parking space, and
getting set up by 1520ish. This comes with an excellent reward; two
male Hen Harriers, and a female as well. At some points, all three
birds can be seen in the same view from the scope. The birds skirt
around the trees to the North of the common, appearing and
disappearing several times across an hour or so. And then, again,
nothing. We wait in hope of an end of day Short-eared Owl, but to no
avail, the Hen Harriers will just have to do.

#### Wednesday

A frustrating day, with a trip to Narberth only to discover the bike
shop I was hoping to hire a bike from has gone out of business. Back
to St. David's. Plan B: let's try and get on the Ramsey boat at 12:00!
Nope, cancelled. Plan C: A trip to the Nevern estuary for some waders
(another recommendation from the Dowrog locals). It's a long drive,
with some interesting diversions in Fishguard, but it's worth it.

The estuary is bridged by the Newport-Moylgrove road, and apart from
the central section, the bridge is one-third parking spaces. Great!
It's possible to bird from the car a bit here, but it's clear things
will be better with a scope from outside. There's a good group of
Curlew's in the water, plenty of Redshanks, one or two Dunlin, some
noisy geese, and a cute Common Redshank.

A pair of birders return from a walk along the Northern side of the
estuary claiming to have found Ringed Plovers. Not an opportunity to
turn down, but a quick expedition doesn't find them. Shame, great
birds. On my return though, a Common Kingfisher is posing on the rocks
on the inland side of the bridge. Delightful.

There's still a fair chunk of day left. My OS map shows me that the
Nevern goes into a steep sided valley that's well treed not far
away. Hmm. Dipper country? A bit of Googling suggests yes. A swift
drive to the village of Nevern later, and I'm on a footpath following
the path of the river again. Well, river. Stream. This has got Dipper
written all over it. At other times of year I'd be hopeful of
flycatcher here, the woodland feels compatible. A pair of Jays
flopping about at the edge give me a nearly complete set of UK
Corvids for the trip; I'm only short Hooded Crow.

But no immediate Dipper joy. And the path veers away from the water
significantly now, making things difficult. The path apparently veers
back to the Nevern after a brief sojourn nearer the top of the
incline.

Or not. Two sturdy chaps breaking up some wood cheerfully inform me
that I'm lost. And that the path I'm on hasn't been a thing for ages,
and that the bridge I'm hoping to cross doesn't exist. Well, pants,
frankly. They advise me of a minimally intrusive alternative route. I
evidently get this wrong, because I end up having to scale a fence to
get onto the road that the next existent bridge carries across the
stream. It's a good job I've recently watched YouTube epic, ["The
Mission Across Wales"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M7w986ni7_g).

Having successfully crossed the stream, I rejoin the existent
footpath. This even has signposts. Luxury. I thoroughly check the area
where my phantom bridge is supposed to be, and there is, as promised,
sod all. Wow! The OS map was wrong! I wonder how you tell them.

The remaining walk is quite hard work - there's a lot of up and
down. On the final down section back into the woods, my Dipper radar
pings. There's a tiny patch of off-white on some rocks crossing the
stream. It is, indeed, a Dipper; I am half terrified and half
impressed my subconscious managed to parse that from here. It sits
long enough for some terrible photos (to be published in forthcoming
feature, "spot the bird") to be taken, before zipping off back in the
direction I came.

That's the last thing of interest to happen; a swift return to
St. David's follows.

#### Thursday

The wind has subsided since yesterday, and the opportunity to visit
Ramsey island cannot be declined. Even though it probably should be,
because, despite the lack of wind, it's misty, rainy, and otherwise
thoroughly miserable. Still. I have suitable clothing to cope with
this.

But, frankly, even with decent clothing, there isn't much to
see. There's a young seal pup frolicking near the place the boat drops
you off, and the warden is cheerful, and knowledgeable about what's on
the island (although, between the lines, I can hear she is telling me
that, barring the seals, the birding is a bit sketchy).

There is a Chough or two, a Kestrel, and plenty of Ravens, but really,
what there is, mostly, is a lot of moisture, all of it determined to
sit on the lenses of my glasses. Should've worn contacts! I zip round
the island walking circuit in record time. In the shop, several other
folk are sheltering with cups of tea, and I join them for a birding
chinwag. We get into talking about other birding islands: The Farnes,
mostly; I mention that Handa is also worth a visit (more on both
another time). Eventually, it's time to head to the boat. And it turns
out that we're going to be the last trip of the year, and we're taking
one of the wardens with us, so we all lend a hand helping her get her
stuff on to the boat. One lonely chap and his dog are left
behind. Hopefully they'll remember to fetch him another day.

#### Friday

I finally manage to go surfing - the mixture of weather conditions
finally whips up a swell making it worth it. Manage to stand up three
times; a small victory for a first outing in more than a year - and
unsupervised, for the first time ever.

On return, I hear news that a Firecrest has been seen near the
graveyard on the North side of the city. With little else to do other
than feel sad about leaving tomorrow, a bit of a search for it feels
apt, despite the unpleasant drizzle. And I've never managed to find a
Firecrest, and this feels like a small search area.

Immediately I come across a large, roving tit flock. It's a mixture of
Long-tailed and Blue Tits, and at least three
_regulus_. Excitement. But they're all Goldcrests. I take the slippery
path down from the church towards the cathedral, and further
Goldcrests taunt me - there are loads of them! I travel up and down
the path a few times, until all signs of the flock have disappeared; I
suspect they've moved up along a thick wall that I think turns into
part of the wall that surrounds the cathedral. I complete the descent
of the slippery path, and take the left turn that takes me into the
cathedral grounds. I skirt round the cathedral clockwise, because the
seriously chunky wall continues up there.

There are a few trees that have grown either side of the wall, and
soon, the flock starts to come into them. Despite increasingly
panicked binocular flitting, I still can't find any Firecrest, and,
honestly, the light is not quite good enough from this angle to show
the supercilium that would help me tell the difference.

To the right of the highest tree, though, something does a flutter
from a branch which looks almost flycatchery. Huh? What the hell is
that? I eventually pick it up as it sits on top of a handy nearby
gravestone, and it's a Black Redstart! And here's me trundling around
town without my camera. Sod sod sod. A quick sprint back to
accommodation fixes this, at the cost of ten or fifteen minutes light,
and a bead on the bird. When it does turn up again, it isn't
comfortable with me being close enough to get a good shot, and various
tourists decide that, obviously, the strange bird man must be best
served by us walking directly at the bird so it is continually
flushed. In the end I give up and take some photos of a much more
confiding Grey Wagtail. Still, a nice surprise to end the holiday
with.

#### Retrospective

St. David's is an excellent place to stay, and, at this time of year,
Dowrog Common appears to have a decent raptor roost. The coast path is
great for Chough and Raven (basically the cliffier the better), and
can occasionally yield some visible migration. There is a strong
chance of encountering Black Redstart (they were seen at several
places along the coast line across the week).

I'm not sure I need to come in November for birding again, but I can
see us paying another visit in the Spring, when the islands come
alive. St. David's might not be the best base for that; it's good for
Ramsey, but less good for Skokholm and Skomer. Perhaps a half/half
holiday could work. We will see.