### Beadnell Bay

A beautiful beach walk eventually leads to one of the UK's last
Little Tern colonies at the [Long
Nanny](https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/embleton-and-newton-links/features/the-long-nanny-little-tern-site).

### Getting there

Access is not as simple as in other places. No 'park the car and be
amidst it in seconds' option here. There are two parking options. The
first at the North end of the bay, in Beadnell, offers a stall that
does excellent coffee and bacon sandwiches at the weekend. The second
is just North of High-Newton-by-the-Sea and, as far as we know, has no
coffee or sandwiches stall.

Public transport wise - it's a struggle. There is a bus from Alnwick
that stops in Beadnell; it goes every hour (until 6pm) and takes just
under an hour. Sunday service looks rather absent.

### How to do it

You should aim to visit between late May and early July; mid June is
probably the best bet to see nesting birds.

Let's assume you're approaching from the North, perhaps after a visit
to the Farne Islands from Seahouses.

Ignore the inland footpath as suggested by your Ordnance Survey
map. It mostly leads through a caravan site. Instead, from the car
park, go straight on to the beach and walk along that instead. There
should be plenty of eider on the sea to keep you company on this
section.

As you approach the inlet in the centre of the bay, sensible National
Trust signs will ward you off the beach and into the dunes. Look out
for stonechat here - it's the perfect place for them and there should
be plenty. Follow the excellent signposts towards the reserve from
this point. If you're visiting later in the day, keep an eye on the
fields inland of the path; we happened across a barn owl over them the
last time we were in the area.

As you approach the reserve, take the leftmost path to a wooden
platform next to a shed like structure. There will almost certainly be
a ranger and a telescope on top to help identify it. All the rangers
have good chat, some of them are also excellent birders. If the terns
are on nests then it should only be the work of a minute or two to
find one. 

If you're a touch early in the year and you've just got a big bunch of
terns sitting on the beach - don't give up hope. The little terns will
tend to flock together and the size difference between them an the
more prevalent arctic terns should make it possible to pick them out,
even without the aid of a 'scope.

Once you've satisfied yourself that little tern has been seen, the
other potential attraction is the nesting ringed plovers; the cuteness
factor of the chicks is astonishingly high.

### Eat / Drink / Stay

Our friends in the North describe [the Ship
Inn](http://www.shipinnnewton.co.uk/) as the best pub in the
world. Book in advance if you intend to eat there, mind.