---
publish_time: 2025-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
updated_time: 2025-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
---
### Cliffe Pools

Large, low tech, low lying reserve. Spectacular gull numbers,
Nightingale and the odd breeding attempt by Black-winged Stilts make
the faff of getting here worth it.

### Getting there

Perhaps you are driving. Lucky you! Park up via Salt Lane and skip the
next few paragraphs.

For the enthusiastic walker, take the train to Higham. On arrival,
head towards Church Street, then take the footpath North through
Higham Marshes to Cliffe Fort. A scope might pick out a wader or two
on the way - I've had Greenshank there, and the mudflats at the end
often have Whimbrel during passage months.

If you fancy a walk substantially under 20km, head to Rochester
instead and grab a bus from there.

On a bike; there are two options. You can travel to Higham and go from
there, or, if you're coming from London, you can High Speed 1 to
Gravesend and take the marvellously scenic NCN route #1. If you go for
the latter, don't be tempted to try to take a short cut via the Saxon
Shore way - it really isn't suitable for cycling, the path gets super
tight at times. The main paths of the reserve are
just-about-cycleable, barring a couple of annoying gates and some
absolutely deadly potholes around the edges.

### How to do it

The official [RSPB trail
guide](https://www.rspb.org.uk/globalassets/downloads/documents/reserves/cliffe-pools-trail-guide.pdf)
is worth having open as a reference.

Having reached the reserve, the main attractions are (with luck!)
going to be visible from the causeway that bisects the reserve's main
pools. On the map, it's coloured pink - the Saxon Shore way
fragment. 

If you make it here on a sunny Spring morning, you should have a
Nightingale or two serenading you; on my last visit one even decided
to pop up right next to me; what a delight. Look carefully amongst the
hordes of Black-headed Gulls on the islands of Radar Pool; there will
likely be several Mediterranean Gulls amongst them. Whitethroat and
Blackcap should also be providing some pleasant audio backdrop. There
really ought to be more finches (every time I come I am surprised by
the lack of Bullfinch) but there are not.

The mud at the back of the Flamingo pool should yield _plenty_ of
avocets. Ringed Plover should also be present in good numbers, in
Spring and Summer, as well as Redshank, Dunlin, Lapwing - the usual
suspects. You will need a scope for a good view from the causeway, but
the parts closer to the Thames are more easily birdable.

Once you reach the Thames - give it a good scan - all sorts of things
could have decided that they fancy a trip up the estuary this far. You
might be lucky and hit the magical Avocet Thames switchover moment; in
this case a couple of hundred Avocets will fly over you in groups of
ten or more. I assume this is linked to tide times (or possibly
light?), but having only caught it once, can offer no more advice than
the existence of this phenomenon. If all you have is boat traffic,
it's time to move on: we can either head North, East and then South
along Mead Wall or head left and try our luck with getting round
Cliffe fort.

#### Option 1: Mead Wall

I've found Corn Bunting singing in this part of the reserve, and on one
particularly early visit, a juvenile Cuckoo. At other times, it's been
a bit dead, right up until a chance encounter with a Spoonbill at the
Flamingo Pool. If you're on a bike, this is the particularly
treacherous pothole section; best of luck.

#### Option 2: Cliffe Fort + Higham Bight

The path to this section is often overgrown with brambles; do not
attempt it with a bicycle unless you wish to be made irate. The views
over the Thames from the fort are good, though, and there's only a
mild risk of subsidence having made the path totally unnavigable. The
mud of Higham Bight is good for waders and contains an
excellent collection of derelict barges, jetsam, driftwood and general
detritus.

The down side of this route is the return to the start - it's a
thankless slog alongside the sailing club lake (also known as 'Alpha
Pool'; there might be a few terns at the right time of year, I
suppose), followed by an easy-to-get-wrong section through the sandy
aggregates yard.

### Eat / Drink / Stay

Cliffe village has one pub, The Six Bells, which I struggle to
recommend for anything other than a refreshing beverage in the
garden. To add insult to injury, there are signs for an alternative
establishment, The Black Bull Inn, but unfortunately it closed long
ago.

### Nearby

The Hoo Peninsula's sprawl is apparently also very good; I've never
managed to get to it, though. 

The RSPB's [Northward
Hill](https://www.rspb.org.uk/reserves-and-events/reserves-a-z/northward-hill)
reserve is also within range, but again; I've not been (but I'd be
tempted to bet Cliffe Pools is better...)

