### Elmley NNR

A huge wild and unpredictable reserve overlooking the swale. Fabulous
for wildfowl, raptors and owls, even if its sprawl makes it somewhat
tricky to fathom.

### Getting there

Driving is the easiest option, and, annoyingly, might be the
best. Why? Well, this is an odd reserve, in that the track leading to
it is often as good as if not more productive than the reserve itself,
and a car is a much better hide than a bike (or no transport at
all).

If you do want to get here without a car...phew. You can cycle from
Swale railway station without too much difficulty. Walking will take a
while. There is rumour of a bus.

### How to do it

Bring a packed lunch (and a thermos, if it's cold); on a pleasant day,
you might want to spend the whole day here. This is also one of those
reserves where a scope really comes in handy - quite a lot of the
birding opportunity isn't going to be that near you.

Official map is
[here](https://www.elmleynaturereserve.co.uk/assets/docs/ELMLEY_MAP.pdf).

The opening hours cover the track to the reserve as well as the
reserve itself. If 9am's a late start for you, drive to the end of
Ferry Road and explore the footpath along the sea wall. I don't advise
entering the reserve in this fashion though; it is possible but rather
muddy, with a strong potential for cow obstacles. Return to the
entrance track for opening time.

The track up to the car park goes through very similar territory to
the reserve itself and the birds that live near it are amazingly
tame. Take your time, stop when you can and scan all the gateposts you
can see; you're looking for Merlin, Peregrine and Marsh Harrier (or
maybe a Short Eared Owl) but you'll just as likely see Redshank,
Kingfisher, Heron, Egret. If you make it to the car park in under half
an hour, the weather must be awful or you went too fast!

When you reach the car park, avail yourself of the facilities - cover
is lacking in the rest of the reserve, and exploring all of it is
going to take a fair old while. If you're here in Autumn/Winter it's
worth giving the area of bushes next to the car park a good scan for
roosting owls; I've been fortunate enough to see Long Eared Owl here,
but that's a bit of a long shot.

When you've convinced yourself there's nothing hiding in the bushes
(or, like me, convinced yourself that you are too impatient to find
birds hiding in the bushes), head down the path to the reserve itself.

Your first stop should be the screen atop the sea wall overlooking
Sharfleet Creek. It's a beautiful view over the Swale even in the
Summer, but in the colder months there ought to be rafts upon rafts of
wildfowl out on the swale - thousands of Wigeon and Teal, and amongst
them some handsome Pintail. Look down to the shore directly beneath
you as well - depending on the tide, the exposed sand should have
plenty to offer. At the very least, there should be a good mixture of
Dunlin and Redshank. There really ought to be some plovers (Grey,
Golden and Ringed), too, and Curlew; perhaps an Avocet or two.

Take a good amount of time here - until you reach Spitend (which you
may decide is a bridge too far) this is the last view of the Swale
you'll have.

Moving on, you'll eventually reach a point where the path splits in
two. All three nearby hides are worth a visit and provide unique
enough views over the main permanent standing water. There ought to be
a pretty stunning number of waders on show (_loads_ of Redshanks -
check carefully for Spotted Redshank amongst them) at any time of year
- a visit from late July to September might yield a passage surprise
or two in addition. You should also be spoilt by constant Marsh
Harrier appearances.

Watch out for Bearded Reedling (as well as the usual reedbed suspects
in Spring and Summer) on the way between hides one and two. Between
hides two and three - just enjoy the walk. Once you're done in hide
three, you've got a big decision to make. 

Do you fancy the 2.5km to Spitend? It's not over particularly easy
ground, and (for me, much worse) you have to come back the way you
came. So why do it? Well, those things are going to put off almost
everyone else...so it's going to be a very tranquil experience. It's
also going to feel very remote. The last time I managed it was on a
weekday, and I didn't see another human for the hour and a half I
spent getting there and back. The view from the hide was excellent -
some very friendly Grey Plover - but the real bonus was when I emerged
from it to find a hare staring at me in the afternoon sunlight.

One further thing before a decision is made; if dusk is happening
before the reserve closes, you're going to want to be back to the car
park by then for the Barn Owl show. Last time I was there, a small
group of cars gathered just outside the car park. A Barn Owl appeared
on cue, and was not-so-subtly followed down the track back towards the
exit (convenient, really) by that same group of cars. A great way to
end the day!

### Eat / Drink / Stay

[The reserve
itself](https://www.elmleynaturereserve.co.uk/stay-at-elmley-accommodation)
offers a mixture of 'glamping' and standard accommodation, and I
believe there is a plan to refurbish the farmhouse to offer Bed and
Breakfast at some point. I've stayed in 'Little Owl' for a freezing
weekend in November once and it was marvellous; there's nothing like
having the reserve to yourself before it opens officially - I
particularly enjoyed my pre-breakfast trundles down to the blind the
overlooks the Swale.

### Nearby

At the East end of the Isle Of Sheppey you can find another excellent
birding area - Shellness, and the Swale NNR. Both are worth the drive
across if you are in the area. In the past I've managed to drag a bike
to all three sites in a day, using a combination of footpath and road
- be warned this can be rather muddy though!