---
publish_time: 2025-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
updated_time: 2025-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
---
A remarkable abundance of bittern, hobby, cuckoo and reed bunting make
this reserve hard to ignore.

### Getting there

It is just about possible to do it via public transport; nearby
Lakenheath station is a request stop for one or two services a day;
you'll have to be disciplined about when you leave, though!

### How to do it

For a hobby spectacular, visit in mid May. In general, hobby activity
after that will be proportional to the number of dragonflies (hot,
sunny days are best). Annoyingly these days will also coincide with
tedious bitey insects; invest in repellent or long trousers as
appropriate.

An earlier spring visit should be good for warblers. Bitterns should
be ever present, but are likely more numerous in breeding season.

Pause for a moment in the car park - can you hear a cuckoo? Stop in at
the visitor centre to check for any news - the folks in there are
enthusiastic and know the reserve well (they will, for example, know
whether there are cranes on site, and where to find them); this section
is loosely based on their advice.

Head into the reserve by following the tracks that heed closely to the
path of the railway. Reedbeds will, in season, yield reed warbler,
whitethroat, and unspeakable numbers of reed bunting. It's a good job
they're such delightful birds, or they'd quickly get tedious.

Take a brief break at the new fen viewpoint; sit down gently, mind,
there's a bit of give in the benches. The plantation at the back of
the fen is likely hiding the cuckoos you can hear. Keep an eye
on the trees - if there isn't a hobby over the reeds, there might be
one entering or leaving a nest in them.

When you're ready to move on, take the path nearest to the water; it
offers better views of the inlets of the fen; important if a bittern
decides to have a quick flight from reedbed to reedbed as it did for
us.

You will shortly have the option to visit the Mere Hide. Our attempt
to do so was rather stymied by a large group having lunch in there, so
the amount of advice on offer here is small. Two gentlemen had had
some bittern success from the boardwalk on the way to the hide.

Continue now to the joist fen viewpoint. The sheer acreage of reedbed
visible from here makes it the most likely place to see hobby from -
it's no coincidence that this is where the counts of 50+ hobby are
taken from. If you're struggling here and the weather is right; try
looking up at the sky rather than across the reedbed - hobbies will
ride a thermal just like any other bird of prey.

Stay at the viewpoint until you are completely relaxed, or the weather
forces you to seek shelter. Return to the visitor centre along the
public footpath along the river.

### Facilities

The visitor centre has toilets and refreshments.

### Nearby

Weeting Heath NWT is a five minute drive away. There is no excuse not
to visit.

### Eat / Drink / Stay

Beware - many pubs in the area are of the "we only serve food between
12:30 and 12:35" ilk. Hockwold stores (on the right as you drive to
Weeting) does some excellent value bap style sandwiches if you can't
be arsed trying to find out which pub will serve you.