### Minsmere

One of the RSPB's flagship reserves, nestled into a rather pleasant
area of the Suffolk coast.

### How to do it

Regardless of the season Minsmere is always a treat. What's on offer
varies quite wildly, so pick your season from the below.

In all seasons: get there early! Minsmere is a very popular and well
marketed reserve; if you want to bird it in peace you should get there
before the hordes descend - access has been possible outside the publicly
advertised hours each time I've been.

The following suggestions act as a companion to the [official RSPB
trail
guide](https://www.rspb.org.uk/globalassets/downloads/documents/reserves/minsmere-trail-guide.pdf)

#### November to February

At this time, you can probably manage Minsmere's winter offering in
half a day. I'd start with a circuit (anticlockwise) around the coast
trail; a quick scan from the hides should be enough to establish if
there's anything more exciting than lapwings out there.

The reedbed to the south west of the path is worth a listen for
bearded reedling - I've seen them flying above there in October. The
alder surrounding the path might offer some interest, too; a small
flock of siskin with some other small friends were on the way through
during my last visit.

The beach has a possibility of yielding snow bunting (you'll need to
either be very thorough or lucky in my experience, though). A scope
might yield some scoters or divers out to sea, too. The return along
the North Wall should reliably produce stonechat unless the weather is
particularly disgusting.

Unless you've found something particularly diverting, an excursion to
the Bittern and Island Mere hides (water rail and bittern are strong
possibilities, marsh harrier is basically guaranteed) should take
you up until lunchtime.

Oh - finally, if you're year listing, marsh tit is a semi-frequent
visitor to the feeders near the visitor centre.

#### March to May

Now you might need a bit more time; a full day, or possibly two
mornings. The sheer amount of birdsong is going to slow you down a
great deal, and there is comparatively more to look out for; not least
the stone curlews (caveat: never managed to see them, so can offer
little advice), the returning avocets (hard to miss, they'll be on the
scrapes), the warblers (everywhere) and the boom of the bittern
(amusingly I've only seen bittern from Island Mere).

You'll probably want to spend half a day on the way round a
combination of the Island Mere and Woodland trails, and the other half
a day traversing the coast trail. If you do use two mornings, see the
[Nearby](Nearby) section.

#### June to October

This whole period just about fits in to the 'fall passage' period; in
reality, the first half of June is probably too early for anything
other than cute avocet chicks, from there on, things might start to
get a bit interesting; perhaps a curlew sandpiper or two might drop
in, or a yellow browed warbler. I've struggled to connect with such
occurrences at Minsmere so I will keep my advice short: Minsmere is
well birded, so check the usual places (and the weather) before
heading up, or there may be only the usual pickings.

## Eat / Drink / Stay

[The Eels Foot Inn](http://www.theeelsfootinn.co.uk/) is spectacularly
well situated, does good food, and has Adnams gin (the gin is now
nicer than the beer). It's very hard to recommend anywhere else.

### <a name="Nearby">Nearby</a>

Assuming you're staying at the Eels Foot, a walk South from the sluice
to Sizewell (or even Thorpeness, for lunch or dinner at [the
Dolphin](http://www.thorpenessdolphin.com/)) would be a nice way to
spend the afternoon and may yield a tick or two.

In particular, at Sizewell, the platforms out from the power station
host kittiwake in Spring and Summer, and you might find an interesting
gull or two feasting on the sewage outflow nearby. I've never managed
to catch the fabled black redstarts there though.

Similarly, a trip North up to Dunwich from the other end of the beach
would be lovely, and, similarly, has an excellent pub, [The
Ship](http://www.shipatdunwich.co.uk/) at its zenith.

### Links

[Official RSPB Page](https://www.rspb.org.uk/reserves-and-events/reserves-a-z/minsmere/)