---
publish_time: 2020-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
updated_time: 2020-01-01T00:00:00.000Z
---
### Padley Gorge

A delightful walk in the woods which can have spectacular payoffs.

Padley gorge is a just that - a gorge, near Padley. At the base of the
gorge, Burbage Brook babbles, beautifully. There are excellent trails
on sides of the brook from Grindleford station up to the top.

### Getting there

It's easiest to start at Grindleford station; trains from Manchester
Piccadilly and Sheffield twice hourly, ample car parking.

### Facilities

The café at the station has a donation based loo. Or you can buy something.

### How to do it

Visit in early May, before the trees are in full leaf, on a day when
the sun will be out.

From the café, cross the railway bridge _and_ the bridge over the
brook, then take the first right, up the hill. There should be an
obvious footpath to take at the end of the road.

After around five minutes walk you will come across the remains of
some stone structures. Look carefully for numbered nest boxes on tree
trunks. They shouldn't be more than twenty feet off the ground; be
patient, once you've found one, others will start to stick out.

Give your eyes some time to adjust to the woods at this point. An
unfamiliar call or a rather energetic flit should give away this
walk's star bird - a pied flycatcher.

Once you've spent a bit of time getting familiar with the jizz of the
bird, head onwards and upwards. On my most recent visit, once we'd
spied our first pair, we rarely went more than a few minutes before
seeing the next. Spot Fly can also be present so anything with that
urgent flit is worthy of attention.

The trail should wend towards the brook as it climbs. Ignore the
numerous opportunities to cross (a bridge at the bottom of an s-shaped
descent, a large log, some dubious looking stones), the bridge at the
top where the woods retreat is where you want to get to.

As the landscape opens up, keep an eye out for redstart, and take a
look at the tree tops you've just left for wood warbler.

Cross the bridge at the top; follow the path back down to Grindleford
station. This side tends to be quieter for the littlies, but if you
pay attention, you should get Dipper (there's a perfect nest point
that was occupied on my last visit).

### Eat/drink/stay

The Grindleford Café, next to the station, does hearty food (excellent
chip butties) in generous portions. It's cash only, mind. In nearby
Froggatt, the Chequers Inn is highly recommended; don't have the prawn
cocktail starter, though.