### South Stack

A tremendous cliff based reserve in a far flung corner of Anglesey.

### How to do it

You're coming here for auks and they're only properly here from April
to June. I've always liked a trip to this part of the world near a May
bank holiday, myself.

South Stack is, unsurprisingly, very popular, particularly on a sunny
day, so get there early. Resist the temptation to head straight for
the cliffs; if memory serves, you need to pay to visit the lighthouse
somewhere in the visitor centre, and it's a right pain to go all the
way down there only to have to come back again.

Once equipped with lighthouse visit tickets, head down to the cliff
edge. Mind the vista doesn't distract you from the dangerous edge! You
should be greeted by a vast array of Guillemots and Razorbills on the
cliffs. Amongst them there'll also be Kittiwakes, and with a bit of
patience, a Fulmar or two. Look up from the cliffs as well as down -
Raven, Chough and Peregrine should be present.

You might be tempted to skip Ellin's tower on "I can see everything
from outside" grounds, but don't. Inside there are usually a couple of
video feeds on nests (there's usually a pair of Peregrine, for
example), and, more importantly, at least one person who has the
clue. In a couple of minutes they should be able to put you on to
anything that isn't _immediately_ obvious.

For example: you might come here thinking that Puffin is a nailed on
certainty. It is not. The area of cliffs (and sea) you will need to
scan is vast. Without a bit of a hint from someone in the know, you
might not be so lucky.

Once you've followed whatever clues you've been given, my usual
approach is to walk to the lighthouse - not least because looking back
towards the stacks from the steps as you make your way down to it are
often the best place to see puffins on the cliffs.

The lighthouse island is interesting in and of itself - Great Black
Backed Gull nest on it, and if the wind's been blowing the right way,
you should have a few Gannets zipping round the coast as well.

Head back to the car park when you're done. If your legs feel up to
it, the hill on the other side has tracks over the heath towards North
Stack that are worth an explore; you might get a better view of Chough
or Raven up there than from the cliffs, and failing that they'll
likely be a confiding Stonechat or two.

## Eat / Drink / Stay

Slim pickings here, I'm afraid. The visitor centre has OK cakes. Years
ago it made proper chips (i.e with a deep far frier) and smelt
tremendous - those heady days are now over though. There's usually an
ice cream van along the road, too.

If you need a proper meal, there are a few places in Treaddur Bay, and
there's a good (if, for the area, expensive) modernized pub in
Rhoscolyn, [here](http://www.white-eagle.co.uk/).

## Nearby

In recent times, the RSPB has also acquired some further heathland to
the south of South Stack (see
[here](https://www.rspb.org.uk/globalassets/downloads/documents/reserves/south-stack-cliffs-trail-guide.pdf)
for details. This might be worth a visit if you felt a bit crowded out
at the reserve proper.