### Wallasea Island

Embryonic RSPB reserve created partially from the diggings up of
Crossrail.

### Getting there

Wallasea is still very, very new - the facilities at my last visit
were a car park and a noticeboard. Driving is probably the most
reliable way of getting there. One option I want to try is taking my
bike on the train to Burnham-on-Crouch and then getting [the
ferry](http://www.burnhamferry.co.uk/) across to the reserve - there
are regular sailings from Easter 'til September, it _may_ be possible
to arrange crossings on an ad hoc basis outside that period.

### How to do it

Wallasea is quite an otherworldly place. If you drive here, a
kilometre or two out from the car park, you might notice a change in
the landscape, from standard farmland to flat oppressive
emptiness. The single track access road with its vicious ramps adds to
the feeling that this isn't a place that's ready for the mass market
yet.

...and what an absolute tonic that is. It gives the reserve a feeling
of discovery that is missing on some of the more well visited
locations. You're on your own; a vast open space full of bird life
demands your attention.

In terms of exploring the site - there are three trails on the RSPB's
official map; sadly two are one way - a tough ask for me (I greatly
dislike going back the way I came). Which to pick? I can't offer much
advice, as I only had time for a quick waltz on the first part of the
Allfleet trail.

The marsh between the sea wall and the river crouch is teeming with
the seaside waders you'd expect (redshank, curlew, oystercatcher,
black tailed godwit), plus an avocet or two. Those same waders should
also be present to the South on the reserve's lagoons. There should be
a vast number of Black Headed Gull on Grass Farm Lagoon; it's worth
checking for Mediterranean Gull amongst them.

Much like at Elmley NNR, every potential perch point should be scanned
for raptors - you may need to use your legs to get near enough to make
a solid identification though, and even then a scope is going to be
helpful. Peregrine and Merlin are seen here all the time; Barn Owl
really ought to turn up in the evening (walk the entrance track and
tell me that isn't _perfect_ barn owl territory), Short Eared Owl is
not an uncommon occurrence either.

Check [SOGNET News](http://sognet.org.uk/News.asp) for updates; I'll
hopefully have more to offer as soon as I can get there again - it
would help if the trains to Burnham functioned more than one weekend a
month.

### Eat / Drink / Stay

Nothing to offer here yet.

### Nearby

There's an [excellent antiques market](http://www.battlesbridge.com/)
in nearby Battlesbridge.